Project Gutenberg's The Stone Axe of Burkamukk, by Mary Grant Bruce

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Stone Axe of Burkamukk

Author: Mary Grant Bruce

Illustrator: J. Macfarlane

Release Date: March 7, 2018 [EBook #56699]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STONE AXE OF BURKAMUKK ***




Produced by Al Haines








[Illustration: Cover art]



[Frontispiece: "'No small beast did that,' he said. 'You are lucky to
be alive, Tullum.'" (Page 15.)]




  THE STONE AXE OF
  BURKAMUKK



  BY

  MARY GRANT BRUCE



  ILLUSTRATED BY J. MACFARLANE



  WARD, LOCK & CO., LTD.
  LONDON AND MELBOURNE
  1922




FOREWORD

Year by year the old black tribes are dying out, and many of their
legends and beliefs are dying with them.  These legends deal with the
world as the blacks knew it; with the Bush animals and birds; the
powers of storm, flood, fire, thunder, and magic, and the beings who
they thought controlled these powers; with the sun, moon and stars; and
with the life and death of men and women.

Many of the old tales are savage enough, but through them runs a thread
of feeling for the nobler side of life, so far as these wild people
could grasp it.  The spirit of self-sacrifice is seen in them, and
greed, selfishness and cruelty are often punished as they deserve.  We
are apt to look on the blacks as utter barbarians, but, as we read
their own old stories, we see that they were boys and girls, men and
women, not so unlike us in many ways, and that they could admire what
we admire in each other, and condemn what we would condemn.  The
folk-tales of a people are the story of its soul, and it would be a
pity if the native races of our country were to vanish altogether
before we had collected enough of their legends to let their successors
know what manner of people lived in Australia for thousands of years
before the white man came.  Some valuable collections have indeed been
made, but they are all too few; and there must even to-day be many
people, especially in the wilder parts of Australia, who are in touch
with the aborigines, and could, if they would, get the old men and
women to tell them the stories which were handed down to them when they
were children.

In the hope of persuading all young Australians who have the
opportunity to collect and preserve what they can of the ancient life
and legends of Australia, I have put into modern English a few of the
tales which may still be had from some old blackfellow or gin.

M.G.B.




  CONTENTS

  I  The Stone Axe of Burkamukk
  II  Waung, the Crow
  III  The Emu who would Dance
  IV  Booran, the Pelican
  V  The Story of the Stars
  VI  How Light Came
  VII  The Frog that Laughed
  VIII  The Maiden who found the Moon
  IX  Mirran and Warreen
  X  The Daughters of Wonkawala
  XI  The Burning of the Crows
  XII  Kur-bo-roo, the Bear
  XIII  Wurip, the Fire-Bringer




I

THE STONE AXE OF BURKAMUKK

CHAPTER I

The camp lay calm and peaceful under the spring sunlight.  Burkamukk,
the chief, had chosen its place well: the wurleys were built in a green
glade well shaded with blackwood and boobyalla trees, and with a soft
thick carpet of grass, on which the black babies loved to roll.  Not a
hundred yards away flowed a wide creek; a creek so excellent that it
fed a swamp a little farther on.  The blacks loved to be near a swamp,
for it was as good as a storehouse of food: the women used to go there
for lily-pads and sedge-roots, and the men would spear eels in its
muddy waters, while at times big flocks of duck settled on it, besides
other water-fowl.  Burkamukk was a very wise chief, and all his people
were fat, and therefore contented.

As blacks count wealth, the people of Burkamukk were very well off.
They had plenty of skin rugs, so that no one went cold, even in the
winter nights; and the women had made them well, sewing them together
with the sinews of animals, using for their needles the small bone of a
kangaroo's hind-leg, ground to a fine point.  It was hard work to sew
these well, but the men used to take pains to get good skins, pegging
them out with tea-tree spikes and dressing them with wood-ashes and
fat, which they rubbed in until the skins were soft and supple; and so
the women thought that the least they could do was to sew them in the
very best way.  Being particular about the rugs made the women
particular about other things as well, and they had a far better outfit
than could be found in most camps.  Each woman had a good pitchi, a
small wooden trough hollowed out of the soft wood of the bean-tree, in
which food was kept.  When the tribe went travelling the pitchi was as
useful as a suit-case is to a white Australian girl; the lubras packed
them with food, and carried them balanced on their heads, or slung to
one hip by a plait of human hair, or a fur band; and sometimes a big
pitchi was made by a proud father and beautifully carved with a stone
knife, and used as a cradle for a fat black baby.  Then the women used
to weave baskets made of a strong kind of rush, ornamented with
coloured patterns and fancy stitches, and each one had, as well, a bag
made of the tough inner bark of the acacia tree, or sometimes of a
messmate or stringy bark, in which she kept food, sticks and tinder for
starting a fire, wattle-gum for cement, shells, tools, and all sorts of
charms to keep off evil spirits.  They had a queer kind of cooking-pot,
in which they used to dissolve gum and manna.  These pots were made out
of the big rough lumps that grow out of old gum-trees, hollowed out by
a chisel made of a kangaroo's thighbone.  The women used to put gum and
manna in these and place them near the fire, so that the water
gradually heated without burning the wood.  There was no pottery among
the blacks, and so they could never boil food, but they contrived to
make pleasant warm drinks in these wooden pots.

When it came to baking, however, the women of the tribe were well able
to turn out toothsome roasts.  Their ovens were holes in the ground,
plastered with mud, and then filled with fire until the clay was very
hot.  When the temperature was right the embers were taken out, and the
holes lined with wet grass.  The food--flesh, fish, or roots--was
packed in rough rush baskets and placed in the ovens, and covered with
more wet grass, hot stones, gravel, and earth, until the holes were
quite air-tight.  The women liked to do this in the evening, so that
the food cooked slowly all night; and often all the cooking was done in
a few big ovens, and next morning each family came to remove its basket
of food.  And if you had come along breakfastless just as the steaming
baskets were taken out, and had been asked to join in eating a plump
young bandicoot or wallaby or a fat black fish--well, even though there
were no plates or knives or forks, I do not think you would have
grumbled at your meal.

The men of Burkamukk's tribe were well armed.  Their boomerangs, spears
and throwing-sticks were all of the best, and they had, in addition,
knives made of splinters of flint or sharpened mussel-shell, lashed
into handles.  Some had skinning knives made of the long front teeth of
the bandicoot, with the jaw left on for a handle; and they worked
kangaroo bones into all kinds of tools.  But Burkamukk himself had a
wonderful weapon, the only one in all that district--a mighty axe.  It
was made of green stone, wedge-shaped, and sharply ground at one edge.
This was grasped in the bend of a doubled piece of split sapling, and
tightly bound round with kangaroo sinews; and the handle thus formed
was additionally strengthened by being cemented to the head by a
mixture of gum and shell lime.  It was not a very easy matter to make
that cement.  First, mussel shells were burned to make the lime, and
pounded in a hollow stone.  Then wattle-gum was chewed for a long time
and placed between sheets of green bark, which were laid in a shallow
hole in the ground and covered with hot ashes until the gum was
dissolved, when it was kneaded with the lime into a tough paste.  The
blacks would have been badly off without that cement, but not all of
them would go to the trouble of making it as thoroughly as did the men
of Burkamukk's tribe.  All the best workmanship had gone to the
manufacture of Burkamukk's axe, and the whole tribe was proud of it.
Sometimes the chief would lend it to the best climbers among his young
men, who used it to cut steps in the bark of trees when they wanted to
climb in search of monkey-bears or 'possums; or he would let them use
it to strip sheets of bark from the trees, to make their wurleys.
Those to whom the axe was lent always showed their sense of the honour
done them by making payment in kind--the fattest of the game caught, or
a finely-woven rush mat, would be laid at the chief's door.  If this
had not been done Burkamukk would probably have looked wise next time
some one had wished to borrow his axe, and would have remarked that he
had work for it himself.

Even though he occasionally lent the axe, Burkamukk never let it go out
of his sight.  It was far too precious a possession for that.  He, too,
went hunting when the axe went, or watched it used to prise great
strips of thick bark off the trees, and he probably worried the
borrower very much by continually directing how it should be handled.
Not that the young men would have taken any risks with it.  It was the
chief's axe, but its possession brought dignity upon the whole tribe.
Other chiefs had axes, more or less excellent, but there was no weapon
in all the countryside so famous as the axe of Burkamukk.  I doubt
whether the Kings of England have valued their Crown Jewels so highly
as Burkamukk valued his stone treasure with the sapling handle.
Certainly they cannot have found them half so useful.

On this spring afternoon Burkamukk was coming up from the swamp where
he had been spearing eels.  He had been very successful: Koronn, his
wife, walked behind him carrying a dozen fine specimens, and thinking
how good a supper she would be able to cook, and how delighted her
little boy Tumbo would be; for of all things Tumbo loved to eat eel.
Just at the edge of the camp Burkamukk stopped, frowning.

A hunting-party of young men had evidently just returned; they were the
centre of a group in the middle of the camp, and still they were
carrying their spears and throwing-sticks.  They were talking loudly
and gesticulating, and it was clear that those who listened to them
were excited and distressed; there were anxious faces and the women
were crying "Yakai!" (Alas!).  The chief strode up to the group.

"What is the matter?" he asked.

The men turned, saluting him respectfully.

"We have fallen upon evil times, Chief," their leader answered.
"Little game have we caught, and we have lost Kon-garn."

"Lost him!  How?"

"There is a great and terrible beast in the country to which we went,"
answered Tullum, the young warrior.  "The men of the friendly tribe we
passed told us of him, but we thought they were joking with us, for it
seemed a foolish tale, only fit to make women afraid.  They told us of
a great kangaroo they call Kuperee, larger than a dozen kangaroos and
fiercer than any animal that walks on the earth; and they warned us not
to go near his country."

"A kangaroo as large as a dozen!" said Burkamukk.  "Ky! but I would
like to see such a beast The whole tribe could feed on him."

"Ay, they might, if one had the luck to be able to kill him," said
Tullum sorrowfully.  "But a kangaroo of that size is no joke to
encounter."

"What!" said Burkamukk.  "Do you mean me to believe that there is truly
such a kangaroo?"

"There is indeed," Tullum answered.  "We also did not believe.  We went
on, thinking that the other tribe merely wished to keep us away from a
good hunting-ground.  We took no precautions, and we came upon him
suddenly."

"And he was a big kangaroo, do you say?"

Tullum flung out his hands.

"There are no words to tell you of his bigness, O, Chief!" he said--and
his voice shook with terror.  "Never has such an animal been seen
before.  Black is he, and huge, and fierce; and when he saw us he
roared and rushed upon us.  There was no time to do battle: he was on
us almost before one could fling a spear.  Kon-garn was nearest, and he
went down with one blow of the monster's foot, his head crushed.  Me he
struck at, but luckily for me I was almost out of his reach.  Still, he
touched me--see!"  He moved aside his 'possum-skins, and showed long
wounds, running from his shoulder to his wrist--wounds that looked as
though they had been made by great claws.

Burkamukk looked at them closely.

"No small beast did that," he said.  "You are lucky to be alive,
Tullum."

"Ay," said Tullum briefly.  "Indeed, I thought for a while that I was
as dead as Kon-garn.  But I managed to dodge behind a tree, and the
bush was thick, so that by great good fortune I got away.  Kuperee gave
chase, but we all scattered, and luckily the one he chose to follow was
Woma, who is the swiftest of us all; and Woma gave him the slip without
much trouble, for Kuperee is so great that he cannot get through the
trees quickly.  So we came together again after a day and a night, and
travelled home swiftly."

"And none of you went back to avenge Kon-garn?" the chief asked,
sternly.

Tullum looked at him with a curious mixture of shame and defiance.

"Nay," he said.  "None of us have ever been reckoned cowards--and yet
we did not go back.  An ordinary enemy would not have made us afraid,
but there is something about Kuperee that turns the very heart to
water.  We hated ourselves--we hate ourselves still--for not going
back.  The blood of Kon-garn cries out to us for vengeance on his
slayer, and in our sleep we see our comrade, with his head crushed by
that terrible foot.  And yet we could not turn.  We have come home to
you like frightened children, and shame is on our heads.  We know not
how to face Kon-garn's wife, who sits there and cries 'Yakai!' before
her wurley."

Another of the warriors, Woma the Swift-footed, spoke up, with sullen
anger in his voice.

"We are shamed," he said, "but there is Magic in it.  No true animal is
Kuperee, but an evil spirit.  No man could possibly stand before him."

To put anything they could not understand down to the score of Magic
and evil spirits was the usual custom of the blacks; but this time it
seemed more than usually likely to be true.  The Meki-gar, or
medicine-men, nodded wisely, and the women all shuddered and wailed
afresh, while the men looked anxious and afraid.  Burkamukk thought for
a moment before replying.  He was a very wise chief, and while he was
just as afraid of Magic as any other blackfellow, still he had the
safety of his tribe to consider.

"That is all very well," he said, at length.  "Very likely it is true.
But it may not be true after all: Kuperee may be no more than a very
wonderful kangaroo who has managed to grow to an enormous size.  If
that is so, he will want much food, and gradually he will hunt farther
and farther, all over the country, until at last he will come here.
Then we shall all suffer."

"Ay," said the men.  "That is true.  But what can we do?"

"I will not sit down quietly until I know for certain that Kuperee is
Magic," said Burkamukk, striking the ground with the butt of his
eel-spear.  "If indeed he be Magic, then it will be the part of the
Meki-gar to deal with him.  But first I would have my young men prove
whether they cannot avenge Kon-garn.  It is in my mind that this
Kuperee is no more than a huge animal; and I want his blood.  Who will
shed it for me?"

There was no lack of brave warriors among the men of Burkamukk.  A
shout went up from them, and immediately forty or fifty sprang before
him, waking all the Bush echoes with their yells of defiance against
Kuperee or any other giant animal, whether kangaroo or anything else.
Only Tullum and the hunters who had been with him hung back; and they
were unnoticed in the general excitement.

"Ye are too many," Burkamukk said, surveying them proudly.  "Ten such
men should be a match for any kangaroo."  He ran his eye over them
rapidly and counted out half a score by name.  Then he bade the other
volunteers fall back, so that the chosen warriors were left standing
alone.

"It is well," he said.  "Namba shall be your leader, and you will obey
him in all things.  Find out from Tullum where to look for this
Kuperee, and see that you go warily, and that your weapons are always
ready.  Go; seek Kuperee, and ere seven sleeps have gone, bring me his
tail to eat!"  He stalked towards his wurley.  The young men, shouting
yells of battle, rushed for their weapons.  In ten minutes they had
gone, running swiftly over the plain, and the camp was quiet again,
save for the cries of Kon-garn's wife as she mourned for her husband.

But alas! within a few days the wife of Kon-garn was not the only woman
to bewail her dead.  In less than a week the hunting-party was back,
and without three of its bravest warriors.  The survivors told the same
story as Tullum and his men.  They had found Kuperee, this time roaming
through the Bush in search of food; and he had uttered a roar and
rushed upon them.  They had fought, they said, but unavailingly: spears
and throwing-sticks seemed to fall back blunted from the monster's
hide, and two of the men had been seized and devoured, while the third,
Namba, who rushed wildly in, frantically endeavouring to save them, had
been crushed to earth with one sweeping blow.  Then terror,
overwhelming and unconquerable, had fallen on the seven men who
remained, and they had fled, never stopping until they were far away.
Weaponless and ashamed, they crept back to the camp with their
miserable story.

Burkamukk heard them in silence.  Other chiefs might have been angry,
and inflicted fierce punishments, but he knew that to such men there
could be no heavier penalty than to return beaten and afraid.  He
nodded, when they had finished.

"Then it would surely seem that Kuperee is Magic," he said.  "Therefore
no man can deal with him, save only the medicine-men.  Go to your
wurleys and rest."

The Meki-gar were not at all anxious for the task of ridding the earth
of Kuperee, but since their art, like that of all medicine-men,
consisted in saying as little as possible, they dared not show their
disinclination.  Instead, they accepted Burkamukk's instructions in
owl-like silence, making themselves look as wise as possible, and
nodding as though giant kangaroos came their way--and were swept out of
it--every day in the week.  Then they withdrew to a lonely place
outside their camp and began their spells.  They lit tiny fires and
burned scraps of kangaroo-hide, throwing the ashes in the air and
uttering terrible curses against Kuperee.  Also they secretly weaved
many magic spells, sitting by their little fires and keeping a sharp
look-out lest any of the tribe should see what they were doing--an
unnecessary precaution, since the tribe was far too terrified of Magic
to go anywhere near them.  When they had been at work for what they
considered a sufficient length of time, they packed up all their charms
in skin bags, and returned to the camp, where they told Burkamukk that
Kuperee was probably dead, as a result of their incantations.  "But if
he is not," said their head man, "then it is because we have nothing
belonging to Kuperee himself to make spells with.  If we had so much of
a hair of his tail, or even one of the bones that he has gnawed, then
we could make such a spell that nothing in the world could stand
against it.  As it is, we have done wonderful things, and he is very
likely dead.  Certainly no other Meki-gar could have done as much."

Burkamukk thanked the Meki-gar very respectfully.  He did not
understand their Magic at all, and he was badly afraid of all Magic;
still, he knew that the Meki-gar did not always succeed in their
undertakings, and he felt that though their spells were, no doubt,
strong, there was quite a chance that Kuperee was stronger.  He would
have felt much happier had the Meki-gar been able to prove that the
enemy was dead.  "If I could give them a hair of his tail," thought he,
"there would be no need for spells, since Kuperee will certainly be
dead before he allows anyone to meddle with his tail."  It was with
some bitterness that he dismissed the wise men, giving them a present
of roasted wallaby.

It was not long before proof came that the Magic of the Meki-gar had
been at fault.  Burkamukk's young men, out hunting, met a hunting-party
of a friendly tribe, from whom they learned that the great kangaroo was
fiercer and more powerful than ever, and had slain many men in the
country to the north.  As Burkamukk had foreseen, he was ranging
farther and farther afield, so that no district could feel safe from
him.  It could be only a question of time before Kuperee would wander
down to his country.

Burkamukk held a council of war that night, at which all the warriors
and the Meki-gar were present.  The chief wanted to lead his best men
against the monster, but the Meki-gar opposed the suggestion
vigorously, saying that it was not right for the head of the tribe to
run into a danger such as this.  An ordinary battle was all very well,
but this was Magic, and against it chiefs were just as ordinary men:
and where would the tribe be without its mighty head?  The warriors
supported the Meki-gar, and they all argued about it until Burkamukk
was ready to lose his temper.  He had no wish to see his best hunters
grow fewer and fewer--already two expeditions had ended in disaster and
loss.  The discussion was becoming an angry one when suddenly the
chief's two eldest sons, Inda and Pilla, rose and spoke.  They were
young men, but already they were renowned hunters, famous at tracking
and killing game: and besides their skill with weapons, it was said
that they had learned from the Meki-gar much wisdom beyond the
knowledge of ordinary men.  Straight and tall as young rushes, they
faced their father.

"Let us go," Inda said--"Pilla and I.  Numbers are useless against
Kuperee; it is only cunning that will slay him, and for that two men
are better than a score.  Give us a trial, and if we fail, then will be
time enough to talk of a great expedition."

The chief looked at them with angry unhappiness.

"And if you fail?" he said.  "Then I shall have lost my sons."

"What of that?" asked Pilla.  "You have other sons, and we will have
died for the tribe.  That is the right of a chief's son.  Other men's
sons have tried, and some of them have died.  Now it is our turn."

A murmur of dissent ran round the circle, for Pilla and Inda were much
loved; and they were very young.  But Burkamukk looked at them proudly,
though his face was very sad.

"They say rightly," he said.  "They are the chief's sons, and it is
their privilege, if need be, to die for the tribe.  Go, then, my sons,
and may Pund-jel make your hearts cunning and your aim steady when you
meet Kuperee."

"There is one thing we desire," Inda said.  "Will you lend us your
stone axe, my father?  It seems to us that Kuperee will fall to no
ordinary weapon, and a dream has come to us that bids us take the axe.
But that is for you to say.  It is a great thing to ask; but if we live
we will bring it back to you in safety."

Burkamukk signed to a young man who stood near him, and bade him fetch
the axe from his wurley.  When it came, he handed it to his sons.

"It is a great treasure, but you are my sons, and you are worthy to
bear it," he said.  "Never before has it left my sight in the hands of
any warrior, and I would that I were the one to wield it against
Kuperee.  Good luck go with it and with you, my sons!"

So Inda and Pilla made themselves ready to go, preparing as if they
were to take part in a splendid corroboree.  They painted themselves
with white stripes, and over and under their eyes and on their cheeks
drew streaks of red ochre.  Round their heads they wore twisted bands
of fur, and in these bands they stuck plumes, made of the white quill
feathers of a black swan's wing.  Kangaroo teeth were fastened in their
hair, and necklaces of the same teeth hung down upon their breasts.
From their shoulders hung the tails of yellow dingos.  They wore belts
and aprons of wallaby skin, and, fastened behind to these belts, stiff
upright tufts of the neck feathers of the emu, like the tail of a cock.
They bore many weapons, and each took it in turn to carry the stone axe
of Burkamukk.  The whole tribe came out to watch them go, and while the
men were envious, the women wailed sadly, for they were young, and it
seemed that they were going forth to die.



CHAPTER II

Pilla and Inda travelled swiftly through the Bush for the first two
days of their journey.  They passed through good hunting country, where
they were tempted by the sign of much game, but they would not allow
themselves to turn aside, greatly as they longed for fresh meat.  They
carried a little food with them, and were fortunate in finding much
boombul, which the white people afterwards called manna--a sweet white
substance rather like small pieces of loaf-sugar, with a very delicate
flavour.  Boombul drops from the leaves and small branches of some
kinds of gum-trees, and the blacks loved to eat it, so Pilla and Inda
thought themselves very lucky.

They met friendly blacks now and then, as they travelled, and heard
many stories of the ferocity of Kuperee.  Some of the reports were very
terrifying.  It was difficult to find out how huge he was, for he
seemed to grow in size according to the terror of the men who had seen
him: some of whom said he was as large as any gum-tree.  But all were
agreed as to his fierceness.  He devoured men in a single gulp: he
struck them down as one might strike a yurkurn, or lizard: his
swiftness in pursuit was terrible to see.  The man he chased had no
chance whatever, unless he managed to reach thick timber, where
Kuperee's size prevented his taking the gigantic leaps which so quickly
ended a chase on open ground.  And about all the tales hung the sense
of blind fear which the great beast seemed to inspire.  No matter how
brave a fighting-man might be, the sight of Kuperee seemed to turn his
heart to water, making him long only to flee like a frightened child.
Their voices shook with terror as they spoke of him.

"It seems to me," said Inda, as they journeyed on, after having talked
to some of these hunters, "that our first thought should be for
ourselves.  All these men have thought themselves very brave, and have
gone out to meet Kuperee, never doubting that they would not be afraid:
and they have become very afraid indeed.  Now you and I are no cowards
in ordinary fighting, and we have had no fear of ourselves.  But I
think we had better make up our minds that we certainly shall become
afraid, and decide what to do.  I do not wish to lose my senses and run
away like a beaten pickaninny."

"That is good sense," said Pilla.  "Perhaps if we managed to keep our
heads during our first terror it might pass after a time, so that we
should again be as men."

"That is my idea," Inda answered.  "And if Kuperee did not happen to
see us while we were afraid, so much the better for us.  I do not
believe that fear will be with us always, but still, we are no better
than all these other men.  I believe we will get an attack of it, and
then it will pass off, like an attack of sickness, if we treat it
properly."

"Yes," said Pilla, nodding.  "But if we run away we shall be afraid for
ever--always supposing we are not dead."

"If we run away, the one that Kuperee runs after will certainly be
dead," Inda said.  "Therefore, let us go very warily, and perhaps we
can manage so that he does not see us during our first fear."

"It is a queer thing," Pilla said, laughing, "for hunters to go out
making certain of being afraid."

"I think it is a safe thing just now," said Inda shortly.  "This
hunting is not like other hunting."

So they went on, keeping a very sharp look-out, and having their
weapons always ready.  The stone axe of Burkamukk was rather
troublesome to them, for their hands were encumbered with spears and
throwing-sticks, and they were not used to carrying an axe: so, at
last, Inda twisted strings of bark and slung it across his shoulders,
where it felt much more comfortable.  Soon they came upon traces of the
great beast they sought.  The forest began to be full of his tracks,
and the saplings had been pulled about and gnawed by some creature
larger than anything they had ever seen.  And then, one evening, they
heard running feet, and, leaping to one side, spear in hand, they saw
half a dozen men, racing through the Bush, blind with terror.  One
slipped and fell near where they were standing, and rolled almost to
their feet.  Pilla and Inda drew him into a thicket.

"Is Kuperee after you?" they asked.

The man rolled his eyes upwards.

"He has slain two of us, and is now in pursuit of us all," he panted.
"Let me go!"  He scrambled to his feet and dashed away.

Pilla and Inda crouched low in the thicket, seeing nothing.  But
presently they heard a mighty pounding through the trees fifty yards
away: and though nothing was visible, the sound of those great leaps
was so terrifying in itself that they found themselves trembling.  The
pounding died away in the direction in which the blacks had gone.

"Ky! what a tail he must have, that makes the earth shake as he goes!"
Inda muttered.  "Never have I heard anything like it!  Art afraid,
Pilla?"

"Very much, I believe," said Pilla.  "But it will pass, I feel sure.
Brother, it seems to me that Kuperee's den must be not far off, and it
would be safe to try to find it, since he has gone southward for his
hunting: and most likely he will return slowly.  Let us push on, while
we can go quickly."

"That is good talk," Inda answered.  "Perhaps we can hide ourselves
near his den, and watch him without being seen.  I should like to get
my terror over in a high tree."

"I, too," said Pilla.  "I fancy the attack might pass more quickly.
Let us hurry."

They pushed onward as fast as possible.  It was not hard to find the
way, for the blacks had fled too madly to trouble about leaving tracks,
and the marks of their running made a clear path, to native eyes.
Soon, too, they came upon Kuperee's tracks--great footprints and deep
depressions in the earth where his enormous tail had hit the ground at
every bound.  Then the Bush became more and more beaten down, as though
some great animal roamed through it constantly; and at last they found
the body of a hunter, struck down from behind as he ran.

"It was no playful tap that killed him," said Pilla, with a shudder.
"The other, I suppose, was eaten as Kuperee loves to eat men, in one
gulp.  See, Inda--is not that where he sleeps?"

They were near a cleared space, where the ground was much trampled.
Bones lay here and there, and in the shadow of a dense lightwood tree
in the middle the grass showed clearly where a great body had often
lain.  No kangaroo has any kind of hole, for they love the Bush to
sleep in, and Kuperee was evidently like other kangaroos in this.
Probably he changed his home often; but this was a good place, ringed
about with bushes that made it quiet and hard to find, so that no enemy
was likely to come upon him too suddenly; while, from his lair under
the lightwood, he could see anything approach.

"Men, or animals, or leaves--it does not seem to matter to him what he
eats," said Inda, looking at the lair.  "No wonder he grows huge.
Pilla, I am very afraid, but I feel I will not always be afraid.  Let
us climb up into the lightwood tree; he will never see us among its
thick leaves.  Then he will come home tired, and perhaps we can spear
him as he sleeps."

They climbed up into the dense branches, mounting high, and choosing
stout limbs to lie on where they could peer down below; and they fixed
their spears and other weapons so that they could use them easily.  The
stone axe of Burkamukk was much in Inda's way in climbing, and finally
he untied it from his shoulders.

"I do not see how I can use this in the tree," he said.  "See, I will
strike it into the trunk, so that we can get at it handily if we need
it."

He smote it against the trunk, and the wood held it fast.  Then he and
Pilla took their places, and watched for the coming of Kuperee.

They had not long to wait.  Presently came, far off, the sound of great
bounds and breaking saplings; not, as they had heard it last, in the
fierceness of pursuit, but slowly, as a man may return home after
successful hunting.  The brothers felt their hearts thumping as they
waited.  Nearer and nearer came the sound, and soon the bushes parted
and a mighty kangaroo hopped into the clearing.

So huge was he, so black and fierce, that they caught at each other in
terror.  Never had they dreamed of any kangaroo like this.  His fur was
thick and long, and of a glossy black; his head carried proudly aloft,
his great tail like the limb of a tree.  And in his gleaming eyes, and
on his fierce face, was an expression of cunning and ferocity that,
even more than his size, made him unlike any animal the Bush had ever
known.  Something of mystery and terror seemed to surround him; it was
indeed clear that he was Magic.  Pilla and Inda trembled so that they
feared that the lightwood would shake and reveal them to the monster.

He sat down, out on the clear space, and rubbed his mouth with his
forepaws, sniffing at the air so that they fell into a further terror,
thinking he had smelt them out.  But one blackfellow smells much like
another, and Kuperee had recently dealt with three blacks: if he
noticed any unusual odour he put it down to his late meal.  He felt
sleepy and well-fed; he had enjoyed both his run and his meal.  Now, he
only wanted sleep.

He hopped towards the lightwood, and at his coming Pilla and Inda felt
themselves gripped by overmastering fear.  Their teeth chattered; their
dry tongues seemed to choke them.  They clung to their boughs, dreading
lest their trembling hold should loosen, bringing them tumbling at his
feet.  So, gripping with toes and fingers, with sweating cheeks pressed
closely to the limbs, with staring eyes that peered downwards, they
watched the dreadful beast come.

He came in under the tree and lay down, stretching himself out to
sleep; and in a few moments his heavy breathing showed that he had
passed quietly into slumber.  As they watched, something of their
terror left the brothers.  Asleep, Kuperee was not so horrible; he
looked, indeed, not so unlike any other kangaroo, with his fierce eyes
veiled and the strength of his great body relaxed.

"I believe my time of fear is passing," Inda whispered.  "He is but a
kangaroo, after all."

"Yes, but what a terrible one!" murmured Pilla, as well as his
chattering teeth would let him.  "Still, we are mighty hunters, and no
fools: unless he is really Magic we should be able to subdue him.  I am
beginning to feel a man again."

"We do not know for certain that he is Magic.  Let us believe, then,
that he is not, and that will help us," Inda whispered.  "Why should we
not spear him as he lies?"

"We might easily do it.  Let us creep to the lower boughs, where we
shall have more room to move our arms.  Art afraid any longer, Inda?"

"Not as I was," Inda replied.  "At least, not while he sleeps."

"Then let us try to arrange that he shall never wake," Pilla murmured.

Very softly, with infinite caution, they crept down the tree, until
they came to the great lower limbs.  Here they had space to swing their
arms, and they made their weapons ready.  Below, the huge kangaroo
never stirred.  His deep breathing, telling of sound slumber, was music
in the ears of the brothers.  They nodded a signal to each other as
they poised their first spears.

So swiftly did they throw that before Kuperee was aroused from his
sleep a shower of throwing-sticks and spears had hurtled through the
air.  Not one missed; the mark was easy, and the brothers were proved
hunters.  The weapons sped fast and true.  But a terrible thing
happened.  Each point, as it struck Kuperee's fur, became blunt, and,
instead of piercing him in fifty places, the weapons fell back from
him, spent and useless.

With a groan of fear, the brothers grasped at the branches and swung
themselves aloft.  Below, Kuperee's roar of fury drowned all other
sounds.  He sprang to his feet, his eyes blazing.  He had received no
injury, but he had been touched--that in itself was an indignity he had
never suffered before.  With another earth-shaking roar he looked about
for his foes.

To be attacked from the air was a new experience for Kuperee.  All his
other enemies had come upon him out of the Bush, and it never occurred
to him, in his rage, to look upward, where the shaking of the branches
would certainly have revealed the terrified Pilla and Inda.  Instead,
seeing nothing, Kuperee made sure that the trees concealed the
attackers.  He roared again, dreadfully, and bounded across the
clearing.  The Bush closed behind him, but the sky rang with the echo
of his terrible voice and the thud of the leaps that carried him
rapidly away.

Kuperee sleeping and Kuperee awake and angry were two very different
beings, and with the first movement of the monster all their fear had
come back to Pilla and Inda.  As roar succeeded roar they became more
and more weak with terror.  Their grip on the boughs relaxed with the
trembling of their hands, and even as Kuperee bounded away they lost
their hold and tumbled bodily out of the tree.

It was not far to the ground, but Pilla happened to fall first, and
Inda fell on top of him, and they managed to hurt each other a good
deal.  They were in that excited and over-wrought state when anything
seems an injury, and each lost his temper.

"You did that on purpose!" Pilla said, striking at his brother.  "Take
that!"

"Would you!" said Inda, between his teeth.  "I'll teach you to hit me!"

He stooped and picked up one of the throwing-sticks and flung it at his
brother.  It hit Pilla violently on the nose, and made him furiously
angry.  He gathered an armful of the fallen spears, and, running back,
threw them at Inda so swiftly that there was no time to dodge.  They
hit him all over his body, and though they had all become blunt, they
hurt very badly.  The blood was streaming from Pilla's nose, and when
he had thrown all his spears he stopped to wipe it off with a tuft of
grass.  The pause gave them time to think, and they stared at each
other.  Suddenly they burst out laughing.

"What fools we are!" they said.

"Yes, we are indeed fools," said Inda, rubbing his bruises.  "Kuperee
may be back at any moment, and here we will be found, fighting each
other like a couple of stupid boys.  I am sorry I hurt you, brother."

"You have certainly done that," said Pilla, caressing his nose gently.
"There will be a dint down my nose for ever--the bone is broken, I
think.  Why don't you hit Kuperee as hard as that?"

"I will, if I get the chance," Inda said.  "And you yourself are no
child when it comes to throwing spears--a good thing for me that they
were blunt.  Yes, brother, we are the biggest fools in the Bush.  Now
what are we to do?"

"Save yourself!" screamed Pilla.  "Here comes Kuperee!"

The great kangaroo came bounding back through the bushes, and the
brothers, wild with terror, flung themselves at the lightwood tree.  Up
they went, but only just in time.  Inda's heel was grazed by Kuperee's
claw as he gained the safety of the lower branches.  He climbed up
swiftly, and, clinging together, they looked down at their foe.

"He cannot climb!" gasped Pilla.

"No, but he will have the tree down!" cried his brother.

Kuperee was flinging himself against the tree, until it rocked beneath
the blows of his great body.  Again and again came the dull thud as he
drew himself back and came dashing against the trunk.  Gradually it
yielded, beginning to lean sidewards.  Lower and lower it came, and
Kuperee, rising high on his hind-legs and tail, clawed upward at Inda.

As the hunter, with a cry of despair, tried to pull himself higher,
Pilla, leaning from an upper branch, thrust something into his hand.

"It is the stone axe of our father," he gasped.  "Strike with it,
brother!"

Inda grasped the handle, and smote downward with all his might.  The
keen edge of the stone caught Kuperee in the forehead, and sank into
his head.  He fell back, wrenching the axe from Inda's hand.  One more
terrific roar rent the air--a cry of pain and anger fearful to hear.
Then, with a dull groan the monster sank sidewards to the grass.  He
was dead.

It was long before Pilla and Inda dared to quit the shelter of the
leaning tree.  They could scarcely believe that their enemy was dead,
until they saw the mighty limbs stiffen, and beheld a crow perch,
unmolested, on Kuperee's head.  Then the brothers came down from the
tree and clasped each other's hands.

"That was a good blow of yours," said Pilla.

"Ay, but it would never have been struck had you not put the axe into
my hands," said Inda.  "I had forgotten all about it.  Our names will
live long, brother."

"That will be agreeable, but I wish my nose were not so sore," said
Pilla.  "And your bruises--how are they?"

"Sore enough--but I had almost forgotten them.  Ky, but I am hungry,
Pilla!"

"I, too," said Pilla, looking with interest at the great dead body.
"Well, at least we have plenty of food--Burkamukk said long ago that
Kuperee should be enough for the whole tribe.  Let us skin him
carefully, for his hide will be a proud trophy to take back to our
father--if we can but carry it."

"We shall eat him while it is drying," Inda said.  "Then the skin will
be lighter, and we shall be exceedingly strong.  Come, brother--my
hunger grows worse."

They fell to work on the huge carcass with their sharp skinning-knives,
made of the thigh-bones of kangaroos.  And then befel the most
wonderful thing of all.



CHAPTER III

Inda and Pilla took off the black hide of Kuperee, and pegged it out
carefully with sharp sticks.  Then they came back to the body, and
their eyes glistened with satisfaction.  Meat is the best thing in the
world to a blackfellow, and never before had either seen so much meat.
It was almost staggering to think that it was theirs, and to be eaten.
All they had feared and suffered became as nothing in the prospect of
that tremendous feast.

"Yakai!" mourned Pilla.  "We shall never finish it all before it goes
bad, not though we eat day and night without ceasing--as I mean to do."

"And I also," agreed Inda.  "Let us make ovens before we begin to cut
him up--we shall waste less time that way.  Some of him will certainly
go bad, but we will do our best."

They were turning aside to gather sticks when Pilla suddenly caught at
his brother's arm.  He happened to seize a bruised part, and Inda was
justly annoyed.

"Take care, blockhead!" he said, shaking him off roughly.  "I ache all
over--is it not enough for you?"

Pilla took no notice.  He was staring at the skinned body of Kuperee,
with eyes that were almost starting from his head.

"Look!" he gasped.  "Look!  He moves!"

Inda leaped to one side.

"Moves!" he uttered.  "Are you mad?"

"I saw his side move," Pilla repeated.  "See--there it is again!"

Something bulged under the stripped skin of the monster.  The brothers
leaped backward.

"But he is certainly dead," gasped Inda.  "Have we not skinned him?
Can a skinned animal move--even if he be Kuperee?"

"Let us leave him and go home," muttered Pilla.  "He is very bad Magic."

But that was more than Inda could bring himself to do.

"Leave him!" he exclaimed.  "Leave the most wonderful feast ever heard
of in all the Bush!  No, I will not.  Magic or no Magic, he is dead,
and I will see what moves."

He sprang forward, knife in hand, and with a quick movement slit open
the body.  Out popped a head--a black head, with fear and pain and
bewilderment on its features.  Inda sprang back, raising his knife to
defend himself.

"Let me out!" begged the head.  "It is horrible in here--no air, no
light, nothing but dead men!  Let me out, I say!"

"Are you Magic?" gasped Inda.

"Magic?  I?"  The wild eyes rolled in astonishment.  "I am Kanalka, of
the Crow Tribe, But an hour ago Kuperee swallowed me at a gulp, when he
came upon me in the forest.  I do not know why I am not dead--but I
live yet, though I was wishing to die when suddenly you let the light
in to my prison.  Make your hole larger, friend, and let me out."

"Do you say there are dead men there?" demanded Pilla.

"He is full of them.  I only am alive, I suppose because I was the last
eaten.  Be quick! be quick!"

Half doubting, half afraid, Inda opened the great body, and helped
Kanalka out.  He staggered and fell helplessly to the ground.  Pilla
and Inda did not trouble about him.  One after another, they took from
Kuperee ten black hunters, laying them in a row upon the grass.  Last
of all they took out Kon-garn and three others of their own tribe, and
they wailed over them.

Kanalka, who had somewhat recovered, came and looked curiously at the
row of men.

"Would you not say that they were alive?" he asked.  "They do not look
as though they were anything but asleep."

"I think it is Magic," said Inda, very much afraid.  "Two moons have
gone by since Kon-garn, who lies there, was eaten, and yet he looks as
though asleep.  Kuperee was a strange host, truly, to keep you all in
such good condition!"

The gaze of Kanalka wandered to the stone axe of Burkamukk, which lay
on the grass near Kuperee.  Instantly he became interested.  He had
seen many dead men, but no such axe as this had come his way.

"Is that the mighty axe of which all the tribes have heard?" he asked
eagerly.  "Ky! what a beauty!  Never have I seen such a one!  I should
like to handle it."

He picked it up and tested its weight, while Pilla and Inda watched him
carefully, for they knew that the axe was a treasure beyond anything in
the Bush, and that a man would risk almost anything to possess it.
They need not, however, have feared Kanalka.  He was a simple-minded
fellow, and was merely lost in admiration.

"A beauty, indeed!" he exclaimed.  "It will be something to tell my
people, that in the one day I escaped from the body of Kuperee and
handled the stone axe of Burkamukk!  Was it with this that you killed
the monster?"

"Ay," said Inda.  "It clove his skull--one blow was enough, though our
spears had fallen blunted from his hide."

"A marvel, indeed!" cried Kanalka.  "It would be a mighty weapon at
close quarters in a fight.  One would swing it round--thus--and bring
it down upon the enemy's head----"

He illustrated his meaning, swinging the axe aloft and bringing it down
over the head of the silent form of Kon-garn.  Just before it reached
the head he checked it, letting it do no more than touch Kon-garn--a
touch no heavier than the sweep of a butterfly's wing.

Kon-garn yawned, sneezed, and sat up.

With a yell of terror the three blacks started backwards, tripped over
each other, and fell in a heap.  Kon-garn surveyed the struggling mass
calmly.

"Where am I?" he asked.  "And what is all this about?  Is it you, Pilla
and Inda?"

They struggled to their feet and looked at him distrustfully.

"You are dead," said Pilla firmly.  "Why do you talk?"

"I do not know why, indeed, since it is evident that I am talking to
fools," said Kon-garn rudely.  "What has happened to you, that you and
this stranger have suddenly gone mad?  Ky! how hungry I am!  Have you
food?"

The brothers suddenly began to laugh helplessly.

"Food!" said Inda.  "There is more food than ever you saw before,
Kon-garn, and a few minutes ago you were part of it."

"That is a riddle I am too tired to guess," said Kon-garn crossly.  "I
only wish that any food were part of me, for I feel as though I had
never eaten in my life."

"It is certainly two moons at least since last you ate," Pilla told him.

"I said already that you were mad, and I grow more sure of it every
minute," said poor Kon-garn.  "Who are these who lie beside me?"

"They are dead men; and a moment ago you too were dead," Inda said.

Kon-garn became afraid, as well as cross.  It was clear that everybody
was mad, and he had heard that it was wise to humour mad people, or
they might do you an injury.  So he hid his feelings and looked at the
brothers as kindly as his bewilderment and hunger would let him.

"Dead, was I?" he said.  "Then how did I come to life?"

"This man touched you with the stone axe of Burkamukk," Inda answered.

"Dear me, how simple!" said Kon-garn.  "None of our Meki-gar know
anything half so easy.  But why does he not go on, and bring all these
other dead men to life too?"

"Indeed," said Kanalka suddenly, "I do not know."

He flung himself upon the stone axe, which he had let fall in his
terror, and touched another still form with it.  Instantly the black
hunter came to life.  Kanalka uttered a wild yell of amazement and
triumph.  Then Inda snatched the axe from him and ran along the line,
touching one man after another; and when he had come to the end there
were ten blackfellows sitting up and rubbing their eyes, and most of
them were asking eagerly for food.  The brothers drew back a few paces
and looked at them.

"It is clear," said Pilla, "that Kuperee was Magic, and that when our
father's stone axe entered his skull it became Magic too.  More than
ever we must guard it carefully, since it seems to have the power of
life and death."  He lowered his voice, speaking to Inda.  "I will lash
it to your shoulders, brother--we are among strangers, and it will be
safer so."

He lashed the axe to Inda's shoulders firmly, and the other men looked
on.  Each knew exactly why he was doing it, and respected him for his
caution, since each knew that had chance thrown in his way the mighty
stone axe he would not have been proof against the temptation of trying
to get possession of it.  Then they all talked together, and were very
amazed at what had happened to them; but since they were able to put
everything down to Magic, nothing worried them much, and they were
quite relieved to find themselves alive, and to think of seeing their
wives and children again.  More than anything, they were overjoyed at
the magnificent feast that awaited them.

And what a feast it was!  Never again in all their lives did such a
chance come to them.  The wild black never asked for any trimmings with
his food: he would, indeed, eat anything that came his way, but meat,
meat only, and still more meat, was what his soul most desired.  And
now meat awaited them, in a huge mountain; and they were hungry beyond
belief.

"We will cut up Kuperee," said Pilla and Inda, "since we alone have
knives.  The rest of you must make fire, and prepare ovens."

The men scattered to their tasks.  Some gathered sticks; others scooped
out holes in the ground for the ovens; others teased dry messmate bark
for tinder for the man who was making the fire.  This was Kon-garn, and
he did it very quickly.  Pilla lent him one of his most useful
household necessaries, which he always carried with him--a piece of dry
grass-tree cane, having a hole bored through to the pith on its upper
side, and a pointed piece of soft wood; and these were just as useful
to the blacks as a box of matches would be to you.  Kon-garn sat down
on the ground, holding the bit of grass-tree firmly down with his feet,
and pressed the point of the soft wood into the little hole.  Then he
held it upright between his palms and twirled it rapidly.  Within two
minutes smoke began to curl round the twirling point, and another man
carefully put some teased bark, soft and dry, round the hole and blew
on it.  A moment more and a thin tongue of flame licked through the
tinder; more and more was fed to it, and then leaves and twigs; and in
five minutes there was a blazing fire, while Kon-garn restored to Pilla
his two flame-making sticks, very little the worse for wear.

The blacks did not usually light a large fire, after the fashion of
white men, who like to make a campfire so big that they roast their
faces while their backs remain cold.  The way the blacks preferred was
to make two little fires, and to sit between them, so that they were
kept warm on both sides.  But on this occasion they made a very big
blaze, so that they should quickly have enough fire to heat the ovens;
and then they made the big fire long and narrow, so that they could sit
on each side of it and cook.  While the ovens were getting hot they
took small pieces of the Kangaroo meat and speared them on green
sticks, holding them before the coals.  They were all so desperately
hungry that they did not care much whether the meat was properly
cooked--as soon as the first pieces were warmed through they stuffed
them into their mouths, and then ran to Pilla and Inda for more.  Pilla
and Inda were working hard at cutting up Kuperee, and though they did
not mind the hungry men beginning without them, they became annoyed
when they came again and again for fragments.

"Do not forget that we are hungry too," Pilla growled.  "We have
travelled far before we killed Kuperee and let you all out, and now we
are cutting up your meat for you.  If you do not bring us some cooked
pieces we must go and cook for ourselves."

That made the others afraid, for the cutting-up of so huge an animal as
Kuperee was no light work, and none of them had knives.  So they fed
the brothers with toothsome morsels as they worked, and the cutting
went on unchecked, until the ovens were hot and there was a pile of
joints ready to be put in.  This was done, wrapping the joints in green
leaves.  Then they carried to the fire the great heap of small pieces
of meat left from the cutting-up, and cooked and ate, and ate and
cooked, all through the night.

Even in ordinary life it would have astonished you to see how much meat
a black could eat--a well-fed blackfellow, with a wife who kept his
wurley well supplied with roots and grubs and all the other pleasant
things they loved.  But these blacks had had no food, some of them for
weeks, and it seemed that they would never stop.  The great pile of
pieces dwindled until there were none left, and then they hacked more
off, and cooked and ate until the ovens were ready and the smoking
joints came out.  They were so hot that you would not have cared to
touch them without a knife and fork; but the blacks seized them and
tore them to pieces and gnawed them, until nothing remained but
well-picked bones.  And then they cooked more.

Pilla and Inda were the first to give in, and they had eaten enough for
twenty white men.  They waddled off to a thicket and flung themselves
under a bush, sleeping back to back, so that the stone axe of Burkamukk
was safe between them.  But the others had no thought for anything but
Kangaroo, and even the mighty axe could not have tempted them from that
tremendous gorge.  They ate on, all through the day.  Towards night
some of them gave in; then, one by one, they could eat no more, and
most of them went to sleep where they sat before the fire.  But dawn on
the next day showed the steadfast Kon-garn, rotund beyond belief, and
eating still.  And by that time Pilla and Inda had slept off their
light repast, and were ready to begin all over again.

They camped for more than a week by the carcass of Kuperee, and ate it
until it was no longer pleasant to eat, even for a blackfellow.  Then
they began to think it was time to return to their tribes.  So they
greased their bodies comfortably all over, and set off through the
forest, a peaceful and happy band, far too well-fed to think of
quarrelling.  When they came near the head-quarters of each tribe they
marched to its camp in a proud procession, returning the warriors who
had been mourned as dead: and great were the rejoicings throughout the
country, and rich rewards of furs and weapons and food were showered
upon Inda and Pilla.  The stone axe of Burkamukk became more famous
than ever, and every one wanted to look at the wonderful weapon that
had slain Kuperee.  Songs were made about the two heroes, and for ages
afterwards mothers used to tell their children about them, and hope
that their boys would be as brave as Burkamukk's sons.

At last they drew near to their own camp.  They halted the night before
a few hours' journey away, and by good luck they met a couple of boys
out hunting, and sent them in to tell the tribe that they were coming.
They had no idea of coming in unheralded, for they knew they had done a
great deed, and they meant to return in state.  Besides, although the
rescued men were with them, the load of presents they had received was
far too heavy to be carried comfortably.

They got up early and painted themselves in stripes and put on their
finest feathers and furs.  Inda carried the stone axe of Burkamukk, and
Pilla had only a spear.  Long before they were ready to start they were
met by some of the men of the tribe who had come out to welcome them.
These loaded themselves with the gifts, and with Pilla and Inda
stalking in front, and the rescued men behind, they formed themselves
into a procession and marched for home.

Near the camp another procession came out to meet them: Burkamukk,
their father, marching at the head of all his tribe.  First came the
Meki-gar, very solemn, and inwardly very disgusted that the honour of
slaying Kuperee had not fallen to them; then came all the warriors and
the old men, then the boys, and lastly the women and children.  They
were shouting greetings and praises and singing songs of welcome.
Burkamukk halted as his sons drew near.  They came up to him and knelt
before him and Inda laid the stone axe at his feet.

"We bring you back your mighty weapon, my father," he said.  "It has
slain your enemy."

Then all the tribe shouted afresh, and the warriors leaped in the air,
and the whole country was filled with the sound of their rejoicings.
And they bore Pilla and Inda home in triumph, naming them the most
famous heroes of all the tribes of the Bush.

But the Magic of Kuperee was not done with them yet.

They feasted late that night, and the sun was high overhead before they
woke next day.  They were in a wurley by themselves, but outside the
boys of the tribe were clustered, peeping in to see the mighty
warriors.  Pilla stretched himself, and flung out an arm, which struck
Inda.

"Take care!" Inda said, angrily, waking up.  "You hurt me."

"Why, I hardly touched you," Pilla answered.  "You must have been
dreaming."

"Well, it is no dream that I am very sore," said Inda.  "All my body
seems covered with bruises, just as it was after our fight under the
tree of Kuperee."

"That is queer," said Pilla, "for my nose also feels terribly sore.
That must have been a mighty blow that you dealt it."  He felt it
tenderly.  "It feels queer, too.  Does it look curious?"

"There is a furrow down it, but then there always has been, since our
fight," said Inda.  "You look not much worse than usual.  But I--see,
is there anything wrong with me?"

He flung off his wallaby-skin rug, and sat up.  Pilla uttered a cry.

"Ky! you are all over spots!  Did I really hit you in all those places?"

"You must have done so," said Inda, crossly.  "Lucky for me that the
spears were blunt!"

"I feel most extraordinary," said Pilla, suddenly "It is just as though
I were shrinking--and indeed, I have no cause to shrink, seeing how
much I ate last night.  But my skin is getting all loose."

"And mine too!" cried Inda, faintly.  "There is Magic at work upon us,
my brother!"

Then a mist drifted over the wurley, and strange cries came out of it.
The boys, watching outside, clutched at each other in fear.  And
presently, when the mist blew away, Pilla and Inda were not to be seen,
nor were they ever seen more.  Instead, within the wurley crouched two
little animals, new to the blacks, which uttered faint squeaks and
scurried away through the camp into the Bush.

There they live now, and through them are the sons of Burkamukk
remembered.  Pilla is the plump 'possum, who has always a furrow down
his nose; and Inda is the native-cat, whose skin is covered all over
with spots.  For the Magic of Kuperee lived after him, so that the
blunt weapons that had struck him had strange power, just as there was
power of life in the stone axe that had killed him.  But though they
lived no longer as men, the names of Pilla and Inda were always held in
great honour, since through their courage and wisdom the tribes lived
in security, free from the wickedness of Kuperee.




II

WAUNG, THE CROW

CHAPTER I

Very long ago--so long that the oldest blacks could not remember
anything about it themselves--there was a legend of the first coming of
Fire.

Fire came with a group of seven strange women, the Kar-ak-ar-ook, who
brought it from some unknown country.  They dwelt with the blacks, and
showed them how to use the new and wonderful thing: but they were very
selfish, and would give none away.  Instead, they kept it in the end of
their yam-sticks, and when the people begged for it, they only laughed
at them.  They alone knew how to make it, and they never told the
secret to anyone.

So the blacks took counsel together.

"We might as well have never learned that there was Fire at all," said
one.

"Better," said another.  "Before it came, we were content: but now,
every one is sighing for it, and cannot get it."

"My wife is a weariness to me," said a third.  "Always she pesters me
to bring Fire to her, and makes my mouth water by telling me of the
beautiful food she could cook if she had it.  It is almost enough to
make a man lose his appetite!"

"But who that has once tasted cooked food can ever forget it?" another
said, licking his lips.  "Such flavour!  Such juiciness!  Twice the
Kar-ak-ar-ook gave Fire to my wife, and let her roast wallaby and
snipe--and since those glorious meals it is hard to eat them raw."

"Ay, that is so," said one.  "To my woman also, they gave Fire twice,
and she cooked me wombat and iguana.  Ky! how much I ate, and how sick
I was afterwards!  But it was worth it."

"And fish!" said another.  "No one who eats raw fish can imagine what a
difference Fire makes to it.  It is indeed a wonderful thing.  The
first time I saw it, I picked it up, admiring its pretty colour, and it
stung me severely.  In my wrath I kicked it, but its sting was still
there, and it gave me a very sore foot.  Now I know that it is Magic,
and must not be touched, save with a stick--and then the stick becomes
part of it.  It is all very curious."

"It is worse than curious that such a thing should be, and be held only
by the power of women," said an old man, angrily.  "If we had fire, the
winter cold would not strike so keenly to old bones.  Why should we
submit to these women, the Kar-ak-ar-ook?  Let us kill them, if
necessary, and take it from them for ourselves."

But no one moved, and all looked uneasy.

"The women are Magic," said one, at length.  "The magic-men know that."

"Yes, and the women's Magic is stronger than theirs," another answered.
"They have weaved spells, but what good have they done?"

"Now, they say that unless they let some Fire drop by accident, we can
never get it from them: and if they do let it fall, then they will be
just like other women, and have no power at all.  I would like to see
that!" said a big fellow, eagerly.  "It would be very good for them,
and they would make useful wives for some of us, for they know all
about cooking food.  I would not mind marrying one of them myself!" he
added, in a patronizing tone, at which everybody laughed.

Another big man spoke.  His name was Waung, and he was tall and
powerful.

"It is all very ridiculous," he said.  "No woman lives in the world who
can get the better of a man.  I have half a mind to get Fire from them
myself."

"You!" said the others, and they all joined in roars of laughter.  For
Waung was a lazy man, and had never done much good for himself.  "You!
You would go to sleep instead of finding a way to get the better of the
Kar-ak-ar-ook!"

This made Waung very angry.

"You are all fools!" he said, rudely.  "I will certainly take the
trouble to get Fire, and will make one of the women my wife, and she
shall cook in my wurley.  But then I will have their Magic, and none of
you will get any Fire from me, of that you may be sure.  Then you will
all be sorry!"  But this only made the men laugh more, and the noise of
their mirth set the laughing-jackasses shouting in the trees.  Very
seldom had the camp heard so fine a joke.

Waung was filled with fury.  He strode away from them, with his head in
the air, shouting fierce threats.  No one took the least notice of
them, because he was known to be a boaster and a talker; but it was
very amusing to see him go, and the blacks were always glad of a chance
for laughter.  Even after Waung had gone into his wurley, he could hear
the echo of their merriment; and whenever two or three went past, they
were still talking about him and laughing.  "A pity Waung is such a
fool!" they said.  "But perhaps it is as well, for if there were no
fools we would not have such good jokes!"  And that did not make Waung
feel any better.

Next day he went to the Kar-ak-ar-ook's wurley, and met them going out
to dig for yams.  Their dilly-bags were on their shoulders; and they
held their yam-sticks, and he could see Fire gleaming in the hollow
tops.  Waung looked at the digging ends of the sticks, and saw that
they were very blunt.  He said: "I will sharpen your yam-sticks for
you."

The Kar-ak-ar-ook thanked him, with a twinkle in their eyes.  They knew
there was some reason for such politeness from Waung.  So they held the
yam-sticks for him to cut, and though once or twice he tried to make
them fall, as if by accident, so long as they had even a finger upon
them they did not move.  So Waung realized that Fire was not to be
obtained in that way.  When he had finished the points, he stood up.

"I am sick of the tribe," he said, angrily.  "They are silly people,
and they turn me into a joke.  If you like, I will come out and help
you to get food--and, I can tell you, I know where to hunt.  Will you
hunt with me?"

Now the Kar-ak-ar-ook were suspicious of Waung, but they were lazy
women.  It did not amuse them at all to go hunting by themselves every
day, for they were not clever at it, and it took them a long time to
find enough game to cook.  Moreover, they were fond of food, and never
had enough.  They knew that no one could take away their yam-sticks so
long as they held them; and so they were not afraid of Waung.

"Perhaps what you say is true," one answered slowly.  "At any rate, I
do not care.  You may come with me if you wish, and sometimes we will
give you some cooked food."

So the camp got used to the sight of Waung and the women going out to
hunt together; and after a while they forgot that they used to laugh at
them, and they had to find another joke.  They envied Waung very much
if they saw him eating scraps of cooked meat given him by the women:
and you may be sure that Waung did not give any scraps away.  He became
quite good friends with the women, though they were always suspicious
of him, and gave him no chance of handling their yam-sticks.  The fire
in the hollow tops never went out.  Waung could not guess how they
managed to keep it alive there, and it puzzled him very much.  But he
never forgot that he had vowed to take it from them, and he made many
plans that came to nothing, because the Kar-ak-ar-ook were always
watchful.

At last Waung hit upon an idea.  Out in the scrub he found a nest of
young snakes, and these he managed to tame, for he was a very cunning
man.  Even when they were nearly full-grown they would do his bidding,
and he taught them many queer tricks.  Then he went in search of an
ant-hill, and sought until he found a very large one.  For the
Kar-ak-ar-ook had told him that they loved ants' eggs more than any
kind of food.

One night, Waung took his snakes, and buried them in the ant-hill,
saying, "Stay there until I send to let you out."  They looked at him
with their fierce, beady eyes, and wriggled round until they made
themselves nests in the soft earth, which caused the ants very great
inconvenience and alarm.  Then Waung covered them up and went home,
taking the Kar-ak-ar-ook a little kangaroo-rat that he had killed.

The women were hungry, and the sight of Waung's offering did not please
them.

"It is very small," they said, discontentedly.  "What is the matter
with you?  You have brought us scarcely any food for three days."

Waung laughed, swinging his spear.

"Hunting has been bad," he said, carelessly.  "I have been lazy,
perhaps--or the game was scarce.  But I have a treat for you to-morrow."

"What is that?" they asked, eagerly, looking up from skinning the
kangaroo-rat.

"What would you say to ants' eggs?"

"We like them more than anything else," they cried.  "Have you found
some?"

"I have found a very big hill," Waung said.  "It should be full of
eggs."

"And you will take us there?"

Waung did not want to seem too eager.  He hesitated.

"I do not want the eggs," he said, at length.  "A man wants something
he can bite--eggs are for women.  But will you cook me a wallaby if I
take you there?"

"Where is the wallaby?" asked the Kar-ak-ar-ook.

"I have not caught it yet.  But I have set a snare in a track I
know--and while you dig ants' eggs I have no doubt I can get one.  That
does not matter, however--I can get one some time.  Will you cook it
for me, if I show you the ants' nest?"

The Kar-ak-ar-ook promised, for the temptation of the ants' eggs was
very strong.  They ate all the kangaroo-rat, and found it quite too
small for their appetites: so they went to sleep hungry, and were still
hungrier when they awoke in the morning.  They had only a few yams for
breakfast, and so they were very eager to start when Waung sauntered up
to their wurley.

They all went a little way into the Bush, and then came upon the great
ant-hill.  At the sight, the Kar-ak-ar-ook ran forward, with their
sticks ready to dig.

Waung said:

"I will go on to my snare, and come back to you."

But he went slowly.  The women had not taken any notice of what he
said.  They plunged their yam-sticks into the hill, and began throwing
out the earth quickly.  Then they uttered a loud scream, for the snakes
came tumbling out of the loosened earth and ran this way and that,
hissing fiercely--and some ran at them.

Waung turned back at their cries.

"Hit them with your sticks!" he shouted.  "Kill them."

The Kar-ak-ar-ook hit furiously at the snakes with the pointed end of
their yam-sticks.  But a stiff, pointed stick is not much use for
killing snakes, as Waung well knew, and he called to them roughly:

"That is no good--use the thick ends!"

The women swung their sticks round at his cry, and brought the thick
ends down across the snakes' backs.  The blows were so strong that many
of the snakes were killed at once--but that was not the only thing that
happened.  Fire flew out of the hollow ends of the sticks, and, in
great coals, rolled down the side of the ant-hill.  The coals met and
joined, so that they were all one very large coal.

Waung had been watching like a cat.  He had picked up two flat pieces
of green stringy-bark; and now he leaped forward, snapped up Fire
between them, and fled.  Behind him came the Kar-ak-ar-ook, screaming.
But as Waung stole the Fire, their Magic left them, and they were
helpless.

Then Bellin-Bellin, the Musk-Crow, who carries the whirlwind in his
bag, heard the voice of Pund-jel speaking to him out of the clouds,
commanding him to let loose his burden.  So Bellin-Bellin, obedient,
but greatly afraid, untied the strings of his bag, and the whirlwind
leapt out with a wild rush.  It caught the Kar-ak-ar-ook, and whirled
them up into the sky, where you may still see them, clustered together,
for they were turned into stars.  Now they are called the Pleiades, or
Seven Sisters.  But the blacks know that they are the Kar-ak-ar-ook
women, and that they live together in the sky, still carrying Fire on
the ends of their yam-sticks.

[Illustration: "It caught the Kar-ak-ar-ook and whirled them up into
the sky."]



CHAPTER II

Waung went proudly back to the tribe, and when they saw that he had
actually stolen Fire from the women, they were both glad and
astonished, and clustered round him, calling him many pleasant things.
Waung was quite ready to listen to them; but he had no intention of
being generous now that he had brought Fire with him.  He saw his way
to a lazy life, and he was not the man to lose such a good chance.

So after they had praised him very loudly and sung loud songs about his
bravery and wit, he went off into his wurley, and put Fire in a hole in
the ground.  Then he sat in the doorway and carved a boomerang.

The people looked at each other, not knowing what to do next.

"How is this?" they said.  "Will he not give Fire to us all?"

No one could answer this question.  They chattered together for a
while.  Then one said, "What is worth having is worth asking for"; and
he went up to Waung's wurley and greeted him civilly.

"Good-day, Waung," he said.  "Will you give me some fire to do my
cooking?"

"I have only enough for myself," said Waung, and went on with his
carving.

"But Fire grows, if you will let it," said the man.  "Will you not make
it grow, so that each of us may have some?"

"I cannot spare any," was all that Waung would answer.  So the man went
back to his friends, and told them what Waung said.  Then one after
another came to Waung, and begged him for a little bit of Fire.  But
the reply was always the same, and they went away, very sorry that they
had ever laughed at Waung.  For now he remembered the laughter, and he
determined to have his revenge.

In the morning, when the tribe was astir they found that Waung had made
a very large oven in front of his wurley, and had hid Fire there.  Also
he had caught a wallaby in his snare, and all the air was full of the
fragrant smell of cooking.  It made all the people's mouths water, and
they hated Waung exceedingly.  But they feared that with the
Kar-ak-ar-ook's Fire Waung had also captured their Magic, and so they
did not dare to attack him.

So they held a council together, and all talked very fast and angrily:
but at the end of it, there was nothing accomplished.  Talking did not
mend the matter at all, and against Magic, what could anyone do?  Then
a woman came running, and said she had a message, and though women were
not supposed to speak in council, she was told to deliver it at once.

"Waung says he will cook our food!" said she, and stopped for breath.
A great shout of joy went up from the men.

"But he will not do it for nothing," went on the woman.  At this all
their faces lengthened suddenly.  The blacks stopped in the middle of
their joyful shout, and waited with their mouths wide open to hear what
was to follow.

"He says he will cook for us.  But we are to supply him with food, and
firewood, and all that he wants, and he will keep for himself all the
food he likes best.  And if we do not perform all that he tells us to
do, he will take Fire away altogether."

There was silence when the woman had finished speaking, and then a deep
groan of anger went up from the people.  They all talked very fast
again, each trying to speak more loudly than the others, all except the
husband of the woman who had brought the news, and he was busy beating
her with his waddy because she had brought so insolent a message, and
had allowed them to think at first that it was good news.  The poor
lubra tried to say that they had not given her time to say it all at
once, but the husband was too busy to listen.  But neither talking nor
beating made the matter any better.

So Waung became the real ruler of the tribe, in everything but name,
since food is the most important thing in the world to the blacks, and
the greater part of their food became dependent upon him.  Nothing
could be cooked unless Waung would do it, and they soon found that
unless he were in a good temper he would not do it at all.  He took the
best parts of all that they brought to him to cook, so that no man knew
what he would get back; and when one took a fat young wallaby or a
black duck it was quite likely that Waung would give him something
tough and stringy when he went back for his cooked meal, declaring that
it was what he had left in his oven.  Neither would he take any trouble
over the cooking.  The people brought their food, and put it in the
oven themselves, and Waung took it out when it pleased him.  Sometimes
he did not take it out until it was burned black and tasteless, while
at others they would find it only half-cooked, and cold.  But no amount
of talking would make Waung alter his ways, and at last he became so
proud that if anyone argued with him he would refuse to cook for a
week, except for himself.  This naturally stopped all argument in the
camp, but it did not make the people love Waung any better.

He grew very fat and lazy, for he ate huge quantities of food, and very
seldom went out of his wurley.  When he did, he carried Fire with him
in a little hollow stick, and no one dared go near him, or near his
wurley, for fear of his enchantments.  As a matter of fact, Waung had
no enchantments at all, and no Magic.  But he was very cunning, and he
knew how easy it was to make the blacks think he had amazing powers.
The magic-men, too, found that none of their spells had any effect upon
Waung, and so they told the tribe that he certainly had magic help.  It
was very convenient to be able to say this when they were beaten, for
Magic was a thing that could not possibly be argued about.

The months went by, and the people became very unhappy.  Waung's evil
temper made them all miserable and afraid.  There have been many bad
kings in history, but only Waung ever had the power of depriving all
his people of their dinner, if they failed to please him.  It is a very
terrible punishment when it is inflicted often, especially when dinner
is the only meal of the day.  Now that the people had grown used to
cooked food, they did not like raw meat; so they depended on Waung's
mercy.  And Waung had very little mercy.  It amused him greatly to see
the people hungry and to have them come begging to him to cook their
food.  He would laugh loud and long, reminding them of the time when
they had jeered at him about Fire.  Afterwards, he would go into his
wurley and sleep, saying, "Fire is asleep to-day, and I cannot wake it."

At last, Pund-jel, Maker of Men, looked down at the world and saw how
unhappy the blacks were under the cruelties of Waung.  It made him very
angry.  He was stern and hard himself, but he saw no reason why this
fellow, lazy and ill-natured, should make his people hungry and
miserable.  So he sent a message to the ear of each man in the tribe,
telling him what to do.

The blacks thought they had dreamed the message.  They woke in the
morning, confused and angry, they hardly knew why; and each man said to
his neighbour, "I have dreamed about Waung," and the other would
answer, "I, too, have dreamed about him."  They gathered into groups,
talking about Waung and about the dream that had come to them; and then
the groups began to drift towards Waung's wurley.

Waung looked out, and saw them coming.  At once he became uneasy, for
he knew that he had never seen such threatening faces and angry eyes.
It made him afraid, and he began to put Fire to heat his oven, which
had been cold for five days.

The blacks came close to the wurley, growling and muttering.  They
circled round, still half-afraid.  Then one, suddenly becoming brave,
shouted a word of angry abuse at Waung; and that was all the others
wanted.  They joined the first man in loud and threatening shouts and
fierce abuse, casting at him every evil name they could think of, and
saying that the time had come for him to answer for his bad deeds.
Then one picked up a stone and flung it at him, hitting him on the
shoulder.

Waung had no weapons outside his wurley.  He became terrified, gazing
round him with hopeless eyes that saw no way of escape.  Then he
stooped to his oven, and saw that Fire lay there in a mass of red coals.

"I will give you back Fire!" he shouted.

He thrust a flat stone into the coals, and with it flung Fire far and
wide among the blacks.  Some of it hit the men and burned them, as he
hoped, but others picked it up and ran with it to their wurleys, so
that they might never again be without it in their homes.  To and fro
in the air the burning pieces flew as Waung hurled them from him.  So
fast they fell that the people were almost afraid again.  It seemed as
though Waung were making Fire, so that he might fight them with it.

And then a strange thing happened.

All the coals that had fallen in the dry grass nearest the wurley
turned and began to burn back towards Waung.  They met in a circle of
flame.  Gradually it burned until it came to the wurley, and there it
wrapped Waung, and his oven, and all that belonged to him, in a sheet
of flame.  Out of it came Waung's dreadful cries for help; but no man
dared go near the fire, nor would anyone have lifted a finger to help
Waung.

The people huddled together, watching, in great fear.  Soon the cries
ceased, and then the smoke and flame died away, so that they saw the
body of Waung, lying across the stones of his oven.  He was quite
black, like a cinder.  The tribe uttered a long shout of triumph, for
they knew that he could trouble them no more.

Then they heard the voice of Pund-jel, speaking to the thing that lay
across the stones.

"Fire has made you black," said the voice.  "Now you shall be black for
ever, and no longer a man.  Instead, you shall be a crow, to fly about
for ever and utter cries, so that when the people see you they will
remember how they were foolishly in bondage to you and your cruelties."

The people cast themselves down, in terror at the voice.  A drifting
cloud of smoke floated from the smouldering ashes of the wurley and
blotted everything out.

When they looked again, it had lifted, and blown away into the skies.
The thing that had lain on the stones was no longer there.  But from
the limb of a boobyalla tree close by came a harsh croak and, looking,
they saw a big black crow that flapped its wings, and looked at them
with sullen eyes.  Then it said, "Waa-a-a!  Waa-a-a-a!" and, rising
from the tree, it flew lazily across to a great blackbutt, where it
perched on the topmost bough, still croaking evilly.  And the people,
glad, yet afraid, clustered together, muttering, "See!  It is Waung!"




III

THE EMU WHO WOULD DANCE

Long ago, Kari, the Emu, was superior to all other birds.  She was so
superior that she would not live on the earth.  Instead, she had a home
up in the clouds, and from there she used to look down at the earth and
the queer antics of all the things that lived there.  It gave her much
food for thought.

At that time there were no human beings at all.  All the earth was
inhabited by animals, birds, and reptiles, and they lived very happily
together, as a rule.  There were no wars, and every one had enough to
eat.  While there were no men, Fear did not live on earth either.  All
the world was a big feeding-ground, where even the smallest and weakest
could find a peaceful home.

Kari, sitting in her great nest up in the clouds, watched the animals
below, both night and day.  She thought them strange creatures, and
wondered very much how they could be so contented with so many other
creatures about them.  She was so used to living alone that it seemed
to her rather unpleasant to have one's solitude broken upon by others,
all of whom might be peculiar enough to think their little affairs as
interesting as one's own.  Kari thought that nothing could possibly be
so interesting as her great lonely nest in the clouds.  In reality, it
was a very dull old nest, and she was a big, dull bird.  She knew no
one, and spoke to no one, and thought only her own queer thoughts.  But
she did not know she was dull, and so she was quite happy.

One day she sat in her nest, watching the cloud-masses drift about
between her and the world.  They cleared away after a while, and she
looked down upon a great forest over which she found herself, for, as
her nest was in a cloud, it used to float about, and so she never knew
what country she might see when she looked down.  Sometimes it was a
lake, sometimes a mountain, and sometimes the great, rolling sea, which
always made her feel rather giddy, because it would not keep still for
a moment.

But on this day it was a wide forest, green and peaceful.  Kari's sight
was very keen, and she looked through the tree-tops to the ground below
and saw all the animals.  It was really almost as good as a circus, but
then Kari knew nothing about such a thing as a circus.  She watched
them with great interest, leaning her long neck over the edge of the
cloud in which her nest was built.

Suddenly she saw a sight that made her lean forward so far that she
very nearly overbalanced and fell out.  Far below her was an open space
near a bright spot that she knew was water in a little swampy place in
a hollow.  The grass there was green and soft; there were trees all
round it, and it was a very secluded place, except for anyone looking
from above, like the inquisitive Kari.

But Kari was not looking only at green grass and shining water.  She
saw a little group of birds that had come out of the swamp, where they
had been wading, and had begun to dance.  They were Native
Companions--Puralkas--but Kari did not know that.  All she knew was
that they were very beautiful creatures, the most beautiful, she
thought, that she had ever seen: and they were doing the most
interesting things.

Very gracefully they danced to and fro on the patch of green grass.
They were tall, slim birds, looking a kind of dim grey colour when seen
so far away.  Their legs were very long and thin, for they belonged to
the tribe of birds called Waders, who get their food by walking in
swamps and morasses, and they had neat bodies, not fluffy like some of
Kari's own feathers--with which she immediately felt very dissatisfied.
Their queer thin heads, with long beaks, were carried on long necks,
which twisted about as they danced.  They pranced up and down, giving
little runs backwards and forwards, marching and stepping in the most
curious manner.  Never had Kari seen so charming a sight.  It made her
suddenly envious.  Until now, she had regarded all the animals and
birds as so much beneath her in every way that it never occurred to her
to wish to be like them, or to do anything that they did.  But this was
the first time that she had seen the Native Companions dance.

Kari's cloud drifted away presently, and she could no longer see the
queer grey company of long-legged birds prancing on the green spot in
the forest.  But nothing that now came within her sight interested her
at all.  She saw the lyre-birds building their mounds in the Bush, and
making them gay with all sorts of odd things: bright stones, bits of
quartz, gay feathers; and they also danced on their mounds, but it did
not please Kari as much as the dance of the Puralkas.  The moon showed
her the animals that come out at night--wombat, wallaby, wild dogs, and
opossums; native bears climbing up the highest trees, and flying-foxes
that trailed like clouds between her and the tree-tops.  She saw the
lizards that live in rocks and on the ground, and the hideous iguanas
that run up the trees.  Great flocks of screaming cockatoos made the
air white, as they flew, the sun gleaming on their yellow crests.
There were snakes, too, in the Bush: great carpet-snakes, evil-looking
brown and black fellows, and the wicked tiger-snake, with its
yellow-patterned back and its quick cruel movements.  Once it had
amused Kari very much to see the jackass, Merkein, swoop down upon a
snake and carry it, struggling, back into a tree.  The jackass was a
silent bird then, and never made any fuss over his captures: still, it
was exciting to see him catch snakes.  But now Kari found that none of
these things interested or amused her any more.  All she wanted to see
again was the Puralkas come out of their swamp and dance upon the grass.

She watched for a long time, hoping always to catch sight of them
again; but though her cloud drifted over all kinds of country, she
could not find the Puralkas until at last, one day, as she leaned out,
to her great joy the little green space came below her again; and there
were the long-legged birds, dancing backwards and forwards as they had
done before.

She watched them breathlessly, until her cloud began to float away; and
then she decided in her mind that she could not bear to let them go
again.  Indeed, she knew now that unless she could do as they did, she
would never feel happy any more.  "I have seen all there is in the
world," she said, "and nothing is half so beautiful as dancing.  I know
I could dance far better than the Puralkas, if I only knew the way.  I
will go down and get them to teach me how to dance.  Then I can fly
back to my cloud, and for ever after I shall not need to look at the
world, for I shall be too happy dancing on the clouds."

So Kari spread her great wings and floated down the sky until she came
over the little green space among the trees.  Then she dropped gently,
and finally landed in the swamp, which she did not like at all, because
she had never before had her feet wet, nor were they made for wading in
the soft mud of a swamp.  She scrambled out as quickly as she could,
folding her wings over her back.

The Puralkas had run back to the edge of their little dancing-ground
when they saw the great brown bird coming down from the sky.  At first
they were inclined to fly away, but they were inquisitive birds, and
they waited to see what she would do, though they were quite prepared
for flight if she proved to be alarming.  But the Emu looked so simple
and meek, and she was so comically upset at getting her feet wet, that
the Puralkas saw at once that there was no cause for fear.  As they
were not afraid, they became rather angry, for they did not like
strangers to see them dancing.  So they clustered together and watched
her with unfriendly eyes as she struggled out of the mud and wiped her
feet upon the grass.

"How are you?" she said, rather breathlessly.  "I have been watching
you all from my home in the clouds, and I think you are nice little
birds!"

Now, this made the Puralkas exactly seventeen times more angry than
before.  They believed that they were quite the most beautiful birds
that ever wore feathers, and it made them furious to be addressed in
this patronizing manner.  Who was this awkward brown monster of a bird,
to drop out of nowhere and talk to them as if she were a Queen?  They
chattered among themselves in a whisper.

"She is as ugly as a Jew-lizard," said one.

"Did ever anyone see such great coarse feet?" another whispered.  "And
her legs!--he-he!  Why, they are as thick as the trunk of a tree-fern!"

"And what a great silly head!"

"She is larger than a big rock, but she is more foolish than a coot,"
said another.  "One look at her will tell you that she has no sense."

"And what is that ridiculous thing she said about a home in the
clouds?" one asked.  "As if we did not know that there is nothing in
the clouds except rain!"

"Why, the big Eagle flew up nearly to the sun the other day; and yet he
saw nothing of nests in the clouds," said another.  "She must think we
are very simple, to come to us with such a tale."

"No one could possibly think us simple, unless she were mad," said
another.  "Every one knows that we are the wisest birds in all the
Bush.  She means to insult us!"  And they all glared at the Emu, much
as if she were a tiger-snake.

Poor Kari felt very puzzled and unhappy.  She felt that she had done a
kind and condescending thing in coming down to earth and talking so
sweetly to these smaller birds; and she could not make out why they
should look at her with such angry eyes.  She rubbed her muddy feet on
the grass, and began to wish that she had never left her nest in the
cloud.

"Do you not speak my language?" she asked at last.  "Why do you not
answer me?"

The Puralkas put their heads together again, and whispered.  Finally an
old Puralka stepped forward with mincing steps and looked her up and
down, so that Kari actually blushed.

"We know what you say, but we do not know why you say it," said the old
Puralka.  "Why should you want to know how we are? and how dare you
call us nice little birds?  We do not know what you are--you are
something like a bird, to be sure, but in most ways you are a kind of
freak.  At any rate, we have no love for strangers."

The unfortunate Kari moved her big head from side to side, and looked
at the bad-tempered old Puralka in amazement.  Her beak opened slowly,
but she was too surprised to speak.  Nothing like this had ever
occurred to her when she lived in the sky.

"As for your extraordinary remark about a home in the clouds, we would
like to remind you that we were not hatched yesterday," went on the old
Puralka.  "Not even the swallows nest in the clouds.  You are only
wasting your time, and we have none to waste on you.  Would you mind
going away?  We want to get on with our dancing."

Kari did not know what to say.  Her bewildered eyes glanced from one
Puralka to another, and, finding no friendly face, came back to the old
bird who stood waiting for her to answer or go away.  She had never
dreamed of anything like this, among her drifting clouds, and her first
instinct was to spread her wings and fly back until she found her own
peaceful nest.  But the Puralka's mention of dancing reminded her of
what had brought her to earth, and she felt again all the old longing
to watch the grey birds dance.  So she summoned up her courage, of
which she possessed surprisingly little, considering her size.

"I'm sure I don't know why you should be so annoyed," she said meekly.
"I mean well, and it grieves me that I have offended you.  It was
because I thought you _were_ nice little birds that I called you so,
but of course I do not think so now--that is, I mean, I----"  She broke
off, for the old Puralka had uttered something like a snort, and was
regarding her with a fixed expression of wrath, and all the other
Puralkas had bristled alarmingly.  "Oh, I don't know what I really _do_
mean!" said poor Kari helplessly.  "You all look at me so unpleasantly.
And it is quite true that I have a nest in the clouds--if you will come
up, I will show it to you.  I live there always, and I have only come
down because I hoped that you would teach me to dance!"

There was silence for a moment, and then all the Puralkas began to
laugh.  They laughed so much that they could not stand--they went
reeling round the little green patch, and at last they sat down, with
their legs sticking out straight in front of them, and laughed more and
more.  Meanwhile, Kari stood looking at them stupidly.  She felt that
it was not pleasant laughter.

At last they ceased to laugh, and, putting all their heads together,
began to whisper.  This went on so long that after a while Kari grew
tired of standing, and so she sat down and watched them, feeling very
unhappy.  Overhead a jackass perched on a big gum-tree, and looked at
the group, with his wise old head on one side.

When they had whispered for a long time, the Puralkas got up and stood
in a row, with their wings tightly folded over their backs.  The old
Puralka came forward.

"You must excuse us for laughing," she said.  Her voice was not rude
now, but there was something in it that made Kari feel as uncomfortable
as she had felt when she had been rude before.  "We did not mean to
hurt your feelings--but we all thought of something funny we saw last
month, and so we had to laugh."

If Kari had been less simple, she would have known that this was only
said out of politeness, but she was very anxious to make friends, so
she looked gratefully at the old Puralka and said, timidly, that she
was glad they were so merry.

"Quite so," said the Puralka.  "It is a poor heart that never rejoices.
But about dancing--that is a different matter.  You see, you have
wings."

"Eh?" said the Emu stupidly.  "Why, of course, I have wings.  Why not?"

"Well, that is the difficulty," said the Puralka.  "Dancing like ours
is the most beautiful thing in the world, of course.  But no one with
wings can learn it.  You see, we have none ourselves."

The Emu gave a quick look at the Puralkas, standing in a row.  They had
folded their wings so tightly over their neat bodies that it looked as
though they had really none at all; and she looked so hard at their
bodies that she did not notice how cunning their eyes were.

"Why, I never noticed that yours were gone," she said.  "Dear me! how
sad!  Do you not find it very uncomfortable and awkward?"

"No; why should we?" snapped the Puralka.  "Wings are really not much
use when you once get accustomed to doing without them.  Dancing is
much better."

"But why cannot one have both?" asked Kari.

"Simply _because_," said the old Puralka crossly.  "We do not know why
these things are, and we never ask foolish questions about them.  But
if you wish to learn our beautiful dancing, you must give up your wings
first."

"Give up my wings!  I could never do that," cried Kari.

"Well, dancing is better.  But it is for you to say," said the old
Puralka.

As she spoke, she made a sign to the others, and they began to dance,
swaying forward until they almost touched Kari, and then backwards
again.  Then the line broke up into circles and figures, and they
danced round the Emu until her head grew dizzy with their movements,
and she felt that to dance so well was even better than to have wings.
To and fro they went, faster and faster, until she could scarcely
distinguish one from another, and their long thin legs she could hardly
see at all.  Then, quite suddenly, they all stopped; and Kari blinked
at them, and could not speak.

"Well?" asked the old Puralka, watching her closely.  "Do you not think
that wings are only a small price to pay for such dancing?"

"Could you teach me?" Kari asked.

"Easily, if you give up your wings."

Kari gave a great sigh.

"Very well," she said.  "I cannot live without knowing how to dance as
you do."

"Then, spread your wings out on this stone," said the Puralka.

So Kari spread her great wings across the stone, and the Puralkas cut
them off quite close to her body with their sharp beaks.

Then they said,

"Stand up."

Kari stood up, feeling very naked and queer without her wings.  Then
the Puralkas began to dance again, faster and faster; and they danced
upon her wing-feathers that had been cut off, scattering them with
their feet until there were not two left together, and the wind came
and took the feathers, so that they floated away over the tops of the
trees and mounted out of sight.  Then the Puralkas laughed again, just
as they had laughed before, until Kari's head rang with the noise of it.

"When will you teach me?" she asked timidly.

"Teach you!" cried the Puralkas.  "What a joke!  What a joke!"  They
burst out laughing again.  Then, to Kari's amazement, they unfolded
their wings and shook them in her face.  The whole green patch of grass
was full of the fluttering of the long grey wings.

"You said you had none!" she cried.

"What a joke!  What a joke!" screamed the Puralkas, flapping her with
their wings.  They spun round and round her, their long legs dancing
madly, and their wings quivering and fluttering.  Then they suddenly
mounted into the air, circled about her once or twice, and flew away
through the trees.  The sound of their wicked laughter grew fainter and
fainter until it died away.

Kari sat down and put her head down on the ground.  After a while she
got up and tried to fly, but the little stumps of her wings would not
raise her an inch from the earth, and very soon she ceased to try.  She
sat down again.

Later on, she stood up and began to try to dance as the Puralkas had
done.  She moved her great feet in the same way, and tried to sway
about; but it was useless.  She looked so comical, hopping round on her
thick legs, that the Jackass, which had all the time sat in the
gum-tree overhead, broke into a great shout of laughter, and all the
Bush rang with the sound.  "Ha-ha-ha-ha!--ho-ho-ho-ho!" screamed the
Jackass.  "Kari is trying to dance--look at her!  There never was
anything half so funny--ha-ha-ha! ho-ho-ho!"

Then Kari knew that she had lost her wings for nothing; that she could
never dance like the Puralkas, and that--worst of all--she could never
go back to her nest in the clouds.  She could not bear the harsh
laughter of the Jackass, and so she ran away, her long legs taking
great strides, crashing into the undergrowth of the Bush.  Then the
Jackass flew away, still chuckling to himself that anyone could be so
stupid.  Soon the little green patch of grass was quite deserted; until
the sun set, when the cruel Puralkas came flying back to it and danced
again.  But Kari never came to it.

So the Emu lives on earth, and has forgotten all about the nest she
once had in the drifting clouds.  She has no friends among the birds,
for though she is a bird herself, she has no wings, and cannot fly.
She has taught herself to run very fast, and to kick with her big feet,
so that it is not wise to make her angry.  Because she used to live in
the clouds and had no proper training, she will eat the most
extraordinary things--stones, and nails, and pieces of iron and glass,
which the blacks have brought into the Bush--but they never seem to
disagree with her.  She is not a very happy bird, for all the time she
keeps hoping that her wings will grow long again and that she will be
able to fly back to find her cloud-nest.  But they never grow.

Always since then, Merkein, the Jackass, has been able to laugh.  He is
called the Laughing Jackass, because of this.  He has been a merry
fellow ever since he sat on the gum-tree and watched Kari trying to
dance, after the cruel Puralkas had robbed her of her wings and left
her far away from her nest in the white clouds.




IV

BOORAN, THE PELICAN

CHAPTER I

Long ago, black people were scattered all over the earth, and the
forests and plains were full of them.  But a great flood came.  For
weeks it rained all day and all night, until nearly all the plains were
great swamps.  Then the snow was washed from the hills, and the rivers
and creeks overflowed their banks, and swept over the country.  There
was scarcely anything to be seen except the tops of the tallest trees
sticking out of the waters that covered the land.  All the camps were
washed away, and nearly all the people were drowned.

In one tribe, the only people left alive were a man and three women.
Their camp was near a river; and when the flood came and the river rose
and washed away the wurleys, they clung to a great log that lay upon
the bank.  It was so huge a log that they did not think any flood would
ever move it.  But they had seen only little floods, and they did not
know what the river could do when it rose in its wrath.

The water crept higher and higher as they clung to the log, and at
length they felt its great length give a little shiver beneath them.
Presently it shifted a little, and the water slipped below it; and soon
it swung right round until one end pointed over the bank.  Still the
flood came rising and rising, and presently a wave flowed right over
the log and washed off some of the people who were clinging to it.  But
the man and the three women dug their fingers into knot-holes and
cracks, and held on desperately.

Then a fresh rush of water took the log, and it bumped heavily three
times on the bank and slid off into the water.  At first, its weight
took it under the surface, and the four blacks, feeling the cold dark
water close over their heads, made sure that Death had come for them.
Still they gripped the log, and presently it rose, and the current
whirled it round and sent it off downstream.  It bumped heavily on a
snag, and one of the women fell off, crying for help as she went.  The
man leaned over quickly and by good chance gripped her by the hair.
Somehow, half pulled, half climbing, she managed to scramble back, and
got another grip upon the sodden wood.  Then the flood carried them
into the darkness.

All through the cold blackness of the night they held to their rocking
place of refuge.  Sometimes it went aground, with a jar that shook it
through its great length, and hung awhile before a fresh spurt of water
washed it off again, to float away into the storm-riven night once
more.  Then there would come bends in the river, when the current would
fail to take the log round quickly enough, because it was so long; and
it would sail on and ram its nose into the bank, running so far into
the soft mud that perhaps an hour would creep past before the washing
of the water worked it loose again.  Then the log would swing right
round, shaking in the eddies, until it seemed that numbed fingers could
hold no longer.  But still the terrified blacks held on, while their
raft spun down the stream once more, with the cold waves splashing over
their shivering bodies.

Dawn broke slowly, in the mist of driving rain, and showed them a
country covered as far as they could see with water.  On either side of
the river, the topmost ridge of the high banks still could be seen: but
soon these were almost submerged and the log floated in the midst of a
great brown sea.

About two hours after sunrise a sudden swirl of water took the log and
floated it out upon the top of the left-hand bank.  It came to rest
with a shock, and one of the women loosened her grip and fell off, with
a mournful little cry that she could hold on no more.  But to her
surprise, the water was only up to her knees, and the log lay at rest
beside her, its voyage over.

The man, whose name was Karwin, grunted as he straightened his
stiffened limbs, slipping down into the water beside the woman.

"That was good luck for you, Murla," he said.  "If the water had been
any deeper you would have gone for ever, for there is no strength left
in me to pull you out."

"I thought it was the end," said Murla, her teeth chattering with cold.
"And, as far as I can see, it might as well have been the end, for it
is better to die quickly than slowly, and we shall never get out of
this dreary place."

"That is very likely," said Karwin.  "But still I am glad to be able to
let go of that shaking log and stand upright once more."

The other women had scrambled to a sitting position on the log, and
were rubbing their stiffened limbs.

"I think those who stayed in camp will have died more comfortably than
we shall," said one.  "How are we to get any food?"

"Oh, there will be no food," Karwin answered.  "Unless the flood goes
down very quickly, we shall certainly starve.  I do not even know where
we are, and I have no weapons.  Ky! none of our forefathers ever knew
such a flood!  It is something to have seen it!"

[Illustration: "'Oh, there will be no food,' Karwin answered."]

"That will not do us much good when we are lying dead in the mud," said
Murla shortly.  "I would rather have a piece of kangaroo now than see
the biggest flood that ever was in the world.  I have had enough of
floods!  Do you think the water will come any higher?"

"How can I tell?" answered Karwin shortly.  Then, because they were all
tired, and frozen, and hungry, they quarrelled about it, and became
almost warm in the discussion.  After awhile, Karwin laughed.

"If I had a waddy I would give all three of you something to argue
over," he said.  "What is the use of becoming angry when there is
nothing to be gained by it?  It will not take us off this bank, that is
certain."

"No, but it keeps us from thinking," Murla said.  "When I was angry
just now I quite forgot that I was hungry."

"All women are a little mad," said Karwin scornfully.  "No amount of
talking could ever make me forget that I was hungry.  It is the most
important thing in the world."

He looked about him.  Behind the ridge of the river bank, on which
their log lay, the current of the flooded stream swept by, deep and
swift.  Before, the sea of brown water stretched as far as he could
see, broken only by clusters of storm-washed leaves, that were the tops
of submerged trees.  There, no current ran; but the wind fled along the
surface of the water and blew it into ripples and little waves.

"I wonder how deep that is," said Karwin thoughtfully.  "I will go and
see."

He took a few careful steps forward.  Then his foot slipped, and he
slid off the mud of the crest of the bank, and immediately disappeared
with a loud splash.  The women set up a dreadful screaming, crying
"Come back!"--which, under the circumstances, was a very stupid thing
to say.  For a long moment the world seemed empty before them.

Then Karwin's head suddenly popped up out of the water, with his face
very wet and angry.  He swam to the ridge, but it was not easy to get
upon it, for the crest was sharp, and very slippery, as Karwin already
knew to his cost.  Several times he clawed at it, only to slide back
into the deep water, spluttering and wrathful.

"Hold on to the log," said Murla, quickly, to one of the women.  "Then
give your sister your other hand, and she can hold mine."

The three formed a chain and found that, by stretching as far as they
could reach, Murla could just touch Karwin with her hand.  He made a
great effort and caught it in a firm grip, and then they pulled all
together, and so managed to tug him over the edge of the ridge.

Karwin was very angry, and not at all grateful to them.

"You might have thought of that sooner," he growled.  "Ky! the water is
cold, and I sank down into a clump of prickly bushes, so that I am
stuck with prickles all over.  There is no getting away from this bank,
that is certain."

"We had suspected that," said Murla, laughing.  At this Karwin became
worse-tempered than ever, for a blackfellow does not like to be laughed
at by a woman, any more than a white man likes it.  He threatened to
beat them all, and even struck out at one of the women who was
grinning, but Murla spoke to him severely.

"Don't do that!" she said boldly.  "We are all in the same fix
together, and we will not be beaten by you.  If you strike one of us we
will all push you off into the deep water--and this time we will not
pull you back.  Therefore, you had better be warned."

Murla looked so fierce as she spoke that Karwin stopped the hand he was
lifting to strike the woman, and scratched his head with it instead.
It was quite a new experience for a blackfellow to be ordered about by
a lubra, and you can fancy that he did not like it.  Still, the other
women were clearly prepared to back up Murla; and he did not forget how
he had struggled in the water at the edge of the bank before they
pulled him in.  So, instead of hitting the woman, he growled
unpleasantly and waded to one end of the log, where he sat down and
gave himself up to very bad temper.  This time, however, he kept it
inside him, and so it did not hurt anyone.

The sisters looked at Murla with great respect, but Murla only laughed
at them.  She was a pretty woman, for a lubra.  Her hair was long and
very black and curly, and she was much fairer than most of her tribe,
with a fine flat nose and a merry smile.  None of her teeth had been
knocked out, which happens to many lubras, and so there were no holes
in her smile.  She was little more than a girl, but she was tall and
strong, and very clever.  And she was not at all afraid of Karwin.

For two days the four castaways sat on their log and watched the flood.
Once it rose higher, when a fresh mass of snow was washed from the
distant hill-tops, and came down to swell the river; and they thought
their log was again about to be carried down-stream, and gave
themselves up for lost, for they knew that now they were too weak to
hold on for very long.  But the log held firm upon the bank, and the
danger passed.  It was very cold.  They plastered themselves all over
with a thick coating of mud, hoping that when it dried it would keep
them warmer; and this helped them against the cold wind, though it was
not at all comfortable in other ways.

But worst of all was hunger.  On the second day they began to break
pieces off the log and chew them, and that, as you can imagine, did
very little good.  Karwin became more and more bad-tempered, and looked
at the women as if it was their fault.  Also, he was very sore from the
prickles, and the two sisters and Murla spent quite a long time in
picking them out of his back, though he was only a little grateful to
them.

On the second day, the water began to go down.  The river still roared
and raced past them, bearing on its breast all kinds of things: trees,
logs, bushes, interlaced fragments of ruined wurleys, drowned animals,
and even dead blacks; but its water slipped back from the bank where
their log lay, until it left them on a little mud island, with the
brown sea still rippling about them in every direction.  The tops of
the trees came farther and farther out of the water, and new tree-tops
came into view, with their boughs laden with mud.  Often they saw
little living animals in the brushwood that went drifting by them in
the river; and nearly all the floating rubbish was alive with snakes
that had taken refuge from the flood.  Sometimes the brushwood would
break up in the current, and they would see the snakes swimming wildly
until the river carried them out of sight.  Two came ashore on their
island, and Karwin killed them with a stick he had taken out of the
river.  They ate them, and felt a little better.  But they knew that
they must soon die if they did not get more food.  They watched the
river anxiously, hoping that it might bring them something else.

Towards evening, they were gazing up-stream, when Murla cried out
suddenly.

"What is that?" she said, pointing to a dark spot on the water.

"It is a bush," said one of the women, in a dull voice.

"No, I am certain it is an animal," Murla said.  "It is floating
towards us.  Let us try to get it."

So they held hands, as they had done when Karwin fell in, and Karwin
slipped into the current, holding Murla's hand tightly.  He had found a
stick with a sharp hook on one end, where a branch had broken off, and
when the dark object came bobbing down-stream he thrust at it fiercely,
savage with hunger.  The hook caught in it, and very carefully they
drew it ashore, and managed to get it on their island.  It was a harder
matter to get Karwin back, but they managed that too, and then they all
lay on the mud and panted, and, except for Murla's fair face, they
looked as if they were part of the mud.

Their find was a plump young wombat, and it probably saved their lives.
Of course they had no way of cooking it, but at the moment that
scarcely troubled them; neither did they at all object to the fact that
it had been dead for a good while.  They ate it all, and long after the
moon had come out to cast her white light into the flood it showed them
sitting on the log, happily crunching the bones.



CHAPTER II

Booran was a very clever bird.  He was bigger than most of the
water-fowl, and very strong.  He was also very proud, partly because of
his great wings, which would carry his heavy body skimming over the
lakes and swamps, and partly because of his beautiful white plumage.
All his feathers were perfectly white, and he was so vain about it that
he scorned every bird that had coloured or dark plumage.  He used to
look at his reflection in deep pools, and murmur, "How beautiful I am!"
If by any mischance he got a mud-stain on his feathers he was quite
unhappy until he had managed to wash it off.  Some people might not
think a pelican a very lovely bird, but Booran was completely satisfied
with himself.

Besides being beautiful and white, Booran at that time owned a bark
canoe.  It made him prouder than ever.  It was not a very big canoe,
but it was as much as a pelican could comfortably manage.  He used to
sit in it and paddle it along with his strong wings.  There was really
no reason why he should have had a canoe at all, for he was quite able
to swim about in the water with far less labour than it needed to
paddle his boat with his wings.  It was only part of his great pride.

Still, no other bird had ever thought of having a canoe, so it pleased
Booran to think himself superior to them all.  No other bird wanted one
at all, but he forgot that.  The Emu laughed at him openly, and when
Booran offered him a trip in his canoe he asked rudely what Booran
thought he could do with his long legs in such a cockle shell?  That
made Booran more indignant than he had ever been since two black swans
had risen suddenly under the canoe one day and upset both it and Booran
in a very muddy part of a lake.  He vowed that no other bird should
ever enter it.  Sometimes a meek little bird, such as a honey-eater or
a bell-bird, would perch on the edge of the canoe and ask to be ferried
about; but Booran never would allow it.  He used to catch fish, and
when he had stored all he could in his pouch he would put the rest in
the canoe, so that soon it became all one dreadful smell.  Not that any
people in the country of the blacks were likely to object to that.
They were brought up on smells.

When the big flood came, Booran enjoyed himself thoroughly.  The river
was too swift for him to attempt in his canoe at first, but he paddled
about in the water that covered the plains, and poked into a great many
things that did not concern him in the least.  Sometimes he ran
aground, when it was always an easy matter for him to jump overboard
and push the canoe off with his great beak.  He found all kinds of new
things to eat, floating round in the flood-water; and some of them gave
him indigestion rather badly.  But on the whole it was a very
interesting time, and he was very glad that he had a canoe so that he
could go about in a stylish manner.

It was on the afternoon of the third day after the water had begun to
go down, that Booran was first able to try the canoe on the river.  The
current was still swift, but he kept in the quieter water near each
bank, and did not find much difficulty in getting about.  He saw a
number of strange blacks on a rise near the water, busily building
wurleys; but they did not see him, for he dodged under cover of the
wattle-trees fringing the bank.  Then he pulled down-stream for a
little while, until he came to where the banks were lower, and not many
trees were to be seen out of the water.  He rounded a bend, and came
upon Karwin and his companions.

Booran's first instinct was to get out of sight.  He was afraid of all
blackfellows, especially when they had spears and throwing-sticks.  But
before he could go, the woman Murla saw him, and uttered a great cry of
astonishment.  At once they believed that it was Magic--so many strange
things could be explained that way.  They watched the big white bird in
his bark canoe, and waited to see what would happen, hoping that he was
not an evil spirit who would do them any harm.

Seeing them so quiet, and realizing that they were unarmed, Booran
allowed his natural curiosity to get the better of him.  He paddled
across the river, swept down a little by the current, and stopped his
canoe in a quiet pool near the mud island, where the castaways sat
miserably on their log.  They looked so forlorn and unhappy that even
his cold and fishy heart was stirred.

"Good day," he said.

"Good day," Karwin answered.

"This is a big flood," Booran remarked.

"Yes, it is a very big one.  All the land has gone away."

"Yes, but it will come back.  Fish are scarce, now that the river is
high."

"That is very likely," said Karwin.

Then, having made all these stupid remarks, as all men do before they
come to business, they stopped, and looked at the sky, and Booran said,
"I wonder if more rain will come!"

Murla struck in suddenly.

"Men are very strange," she said.  "They are always ready to jabber.
How is it that you go about in that little boat?"

"Because I like it," said Booran shortly, for he did not approve of
women talking so freely, neither did he like the question about his
canoe.

Murla laughed.  "You look very funny when you are cross," she said.  "I
never saw such a dignified pelican."  The other women shuddered, for
they thought that Booran might be an evil spirit, in which case he
would certainly object to such free-and-easy remarks.  But Booran
looked at Murla, and saw how pretty she was, and suddenly he did not
wish to be angry.  Instead, he smiled at her; and no one who has not
seen it can imagine how peculiar a pelican looks when he smiles.

"It is a very useful canoe," he said.  "I have been all over the
flood-waters in it, and have seen many wonderful things."

"Have you any food?" asked Murla eagerly.

"No, for I have eaten it all.  But I may come across some at any time.
Would you like it?"

"Like it!" said Murla.  "Why, we have only had two snakes and a wombat
between us for four days--and the wombat was only a little one.  I
could eat the quills of a porcupine!"

"Dear me," said Booran, looking at her with his foolish little eyes
very wide.  "That would be very unpleasant, would it not?  I quite
regret that I ate an old fish that I found in the stern of my canoe
this morning.  Not that it would have made much of a meal for four
people."

"It would have given me a breakfast," said Karwin rudely.  "But as
there is no food, there is no use in talking about it.  Tell me,
Pelican, have you seen any of our people?  We do not know if there are
any left alive."

"I have seen some blacks, but I do not know if they are your people,"
Booran answered.  "They are across the river, where they are building
themselves new huts."

"Can't you go and see if they belong to our tribe?"

Booran shook his big head decidedly.

"Not I," he said.  "Most blacks are very uncivil to pelicans, and these
had weapons close at hand.  I have no wish to be found with a spear
sticking in my heart, or in any other part of me."

"Did you notice what they were like?" Murla asked eagerly.

"I saw a fat woman, and a thin man," said Booran stupidly.  "How should
I know what they were like?  They are not beautiful like pelicans.  Oh,
and I saw a very tall man, with a red bone through his nose.  He was
sitting idly on a stump while the others worked."

"That was my husband!" said Murla with a faint shriek.  "Alas, I
thought he was drowned!  And the fat woman may be your wife, Goomah,"
she said to Karwin.

"Very likely," said Karwin.  "Did you notice if they had food?"

"I do not know.  But it is likely, for they had fire, and there was a
pleasant smell."

"If my wife Goomah has food and fire, while I have nothing, there will
be trouble," said Karwin wrathfully.

"That may be, but we will die here without ever knowing," Murla said.
"Long before the water goes down we will have starved to death, and
then nothing will matter."  She broke off a bit of wood and flung it
into the swirling river.  "I wish we had never tried to save ourselves,
or seen that hateful log!"

Now, Booran had been watching Murla, and he thought she looked very
capable, and he thought that she could be very useful to him if he
could get her away to some place where she could catch fish for him, so
that he might spend all his time admiring himself and paddling about in
his canoe.

But he did not quite know how to manage it.

Karwin and the woman went on wrangling.  They had not been happy before
Booran came with his tidings; but now they could only think of their
fellow-blacks feasting and making a warm and comfortable camp, and it
made them feel very much worse than they had felt before.  They shouted
long and loudly in the hope of making the others hear; but no answer
came, and the river rushed by them without pity, and they hated their
little mud island.

All the time, Booran gazed at Murla, and at last he made up his mind
that he could not possibly do without her.  Whatever happened, he must
get her away, and sail with her in his bark canoe to an island where
the blacks could never find her.  The others were talking so fast that
he had time to think out a plan, and when they stopped for lack of
breath, he spoke.

"I think, if you sat very still and got in and out very carefully, that
I could take you across the river, one at a time," he said, speaking in
a great hurry.

"That thing would sink," said Karwin sulkily, looking at the little
canoe with eyes of scorn.

"No, it does not sink easily.  You would have to be very careful, but
it would be safe."

Karwin looked at the canoe, and then he looked at the trees that showed
round the bend, when the high banks were quite clear of water.  It was
very tempting to think of getting there--such a little way!  He thought
hard.  Then he said:

"You can take Kari first--she is the lightest, and if the canoe does
not sink with her, perhaps I will go."

Booran did not care which he took first, so long as it was not Murla.
But the woman Kari objected very strongly, and made a great outcry, for
she thought she would be drowned.  However, the others were all agreed
that she should go, so there was no use in objecting, and she had to
give in.  Crying and trembling, she stepped into the canoe, which
Booran brought close to the bank.

The canoe went down a good deal, but it did not sink, and Booran
paddled gently up the stream, keeping very close to the bank, so that
the current did not sweep him down.  He disappeared round the bend, and
for awhile Karwin and the two women who were left watched anxiously,
fearing to see the upturned canoe float back empty.  But in about ten
minutes they saw Booran turn the corner and paddle swiftly down,
evidently very pleased with himself.  When he got near the mud island
he called out, "All is well!  I landed her easily on the bank, and she
has run to the camp."

That made the others eager, and Murla stepped forward to get into the
canoe.  But Booran stopped her, saying, "Not now--next time!"--and
before she could argue, Karwin twisted her out of his way, and stepped
into the canoe so hurriedly that it nearly sank, and Booran called out
very angrily to him to mind what he was doing.  However, the canoe
righted itself, and presently Booran had paddled it out of sight again.

Murla began to feel a little uneasy, though she scarcely knew why.
There was something wrong about the way that Booran looked at her, with
his cold eyes that were so like a fish's.  She felt she would be glad
when she was out of his canoe, and safely on the same side as her
people.  She did not want to get into the canoe at all; but as it was
necessary to do so, she decided to get it over as soon as possible.  So
she said to the other black woman, "I will go next, Meri."

"All right," said Meri, shivering under her little 'possum rug and her
coat of mud.  "But tell the Pelican to hurry back, or I shall certainly
die of cold."

Murla waited impatiently until Booran appeared, and when the canoe came
alongside the bank she was ready.  But Booran looked at her queerly,
and said, "Not now--next time!

"Why?" asked Murla angrily.  "This is my turn."

"Not now--next time!" was all Booran would say; and he beckoned to
Meri, who was not slow to obey, for she was very tired of waiting.  She
stepped in, and the canoe moved away from the mud island.

Suddenly Murla was very much afraid, although as a rule she did not
know what fear meant.  She felt that she must not get into Booran's
canoe--that there was danger coming very close to her.  In a few
minutes he would be back for her.  A quick resolve came to her mind.
Whatever happened, Booran must not find her there when he came back.

She slipped off her 'possum rug and wrapped it round a log that had
come ashore on their island.  It was just as long as she was, and when
the rug was wrapped about it, it looked as if she were lying asleep.
Then she slipped into the river, and began to swim across.

Booran and Meri were out of sight round the bend, and what she wanted
to do was to get to the other side before the canoe came back.  But it
was not an easy matter.  The current was swift, and though she was a
very strong swimmer, it took her down-stream; and once she thought that
she must be drowned.  However, just as she was on the point of giving
up, she felt the ground under her feet, and scrambled out upon a bank
that was nearly all under water.  Then she waded along it until she got
near the bend.

Just then she heard the noise of Booran's wings brushing in the water.
She flung herself down on her face--just in time, for the canoe came
round the bend, and passed quite close to her.  Booran heard the swirl
in the water, and glanced round, seeing the ripples; but just then he
caught sight of what looked like Murla, lying on the mud island, and he
said, "Oh, it was only a water rat!" and paddled on.

Murla lay still in the water, holding her breath, until he had floated
down the stream.  Then she got up very quietly and waded, sinking in
the soft mud of the bank until it grew higher, and trees and dry land
could be seen.  She ran then, casting her eyes wildly about until she
saw ahead a little drift of smoke; and presently, toiling up a steep
rise in the bank, she came upon the blacks, where already Karwin and
Meri and Kari were jabbering loudly, telling all their experiences and
hearing those of the others at the same time.  They cried out with
astonishment when they saw Murla coming along the bank, and asked her
why Booran had not brought her in his canoe.

When she told them she had been afraid of him, they all laughed at her.
But her husband, the tall man with the red bone through his nose, was
very angry because she had left her 'possum rug behind, and asked her
if she thought rugs like that grew on wild cherry-trees.  He went off
at once to see if he could get it back, telling her as he went that if
he failed, she need not think she was going to have his.  Of course,
Murla had known that already.

Meanwhile, Booran had paddled down to the mud island, and, seeing the
form in the 'possum rug, lying under the shelter of the great log, he
called to it several times, saying, "Come on, now.  It is your turn."
But no movement came, and at last he grew angry, and hopped out of the
canoe and went on to the island, still calling.  There was no answer,
and he lost his temper and kicked the figure very hard--with the result
that he hurt his foot very much.  Then he pulled the rug off roughly,
and found only a log underneath.

Booran became furious.  He had been made to look a fool.  For awhile he
stamped about the island, screaming in his rage, and when the blacks
got to the opposite bank that is how they saw him.  Then Booran made up
his mind that he would "look out fight," as the blacks do, and kill the
husband of the woman.

So he took some mud and smeared it on himself in long lines, so that he
might be striped as the blacks are when they go fighting: for a
blackfellow does not consider himself dressed for battle until he has
painted himself in long white streaks with pipeclay.  He was so busy
painting, and planning how he would slay Murla's husband, that he did
not see a black shadow in the sky.  It was another pelican, and he came
nearer, puzzled to know what could be this strange thing, so like a
pelican and yet striped like a fighting man.  He could not make it out,
but he decided it could not be right; and so he drove at Booran and
struck him in the throat with his great beak, killing him.  Then he
flew away.

Now the blacks say, there are no black pelicans any more.  They are all
black and white, just as Booran was when his Death came to him suddenly
out of the sky.

The blacks across the river were very much amazed.  But when the great
black Pelican had sailed away, Murla's husband swam across and got her
'possum rug, which he brought back, tied on top of his head.  He gave
it back to Murla, and then beat her with his waddy for having been so
careless as to leave it behind.  So they lived happily ever after.

But the river took Booran's little canoe and whisked it away.  It
bobbed upon the brown water like a walnut shell, spinning in the
eddies, and sailing proudly where the water was clear and free.  At
each mile the river grew wider and fuller, and the little canoe sped
onwards on its breast.  Then ahead came a long line of gleaming silver,
and the river sang that it had nearly reached the sea.  The light canoe
rocked over the waters of the bar, but came safely through them; and
then it floated away westward, into the sunset.

But the tide brought it back to shore, and the breakers took it and
flung it on the rocks, pounding it on their sharp edges until it was no
longer a canoe, but only a twisted bit of bark.  The waves went back
and left it lying on the beach; and some blacks who came along, hungry
and cold, were very glad to find it and use it to start their fire,
when it was dry.  So Booran's canoe was useful to the blacks until the
very end.




V

THE STORY OF THE STARS

Pund-jel, who was Maker of Men, sat in his high place one day and
looked at the world.  The blacks believed that in the very long ago he
had made the first men and women out of clay; and from there they had
spread over all the earth.  Pund-jel had made them to be good and
happy, and for a long while he had been satisfied with them.  But now
it was different, and he was angry.

All over the world he could see his black people.  They had grown tall
and strong, and he thought them beautiful.  They were skilled in
hunting, and fierce in battle: the women were clever at making rugs of
skins, at cooking, at weaving curious mats and baskets of pliant
rushes.  The forests were full of game for them---birds, beasts and
reptiles, all good to eat: there were fish in the lakes and rivers, fat
mud-eels in the creeks and swamps, and gum and manna to be found on
every hill-side.  The world was a good, green world, and there should
have been only happiness.  But the people themselves had grown wicked.

Pund-jel bent his brows with anger as he looked down upon them.
Instead of being peaceful and content, his people had grown fierce and
savage.  They thought only of fighting and conquest, and were too lazy
to work.  The laws that he had made for them were as naught in their
eyes.  They said, "Oh, Pund-jel is very far away.  He will never come
down into our world to see what we do.  Why should we obey him?"  So
they did just as they pleased, and all the world was evil because of
their wickedness.

Pund-jel thought gravely as he looked down into his world, and all the
sky was dark with the blackness of his frown.

"My people have grown too many," he said.  "When they were few, each
helped the other: there was no time for feuds or fighting, for all had
to work together in order to live.  Now all is changed.  They are many
and powerful, and they over-run the world, and each man hates his
brother.  It were better if I made them fewer, and scattered them far
and wide.  I will send my whirlwinds upon the earth."

So Pund-jel caused storms and fierce winds to arise often, and they
swept across the world.  In the flat lands there came suddenly
whirlwinds of great force, that twisted and eddied through the plains,
carrying men aloft in their choking embrace, and letting them fall,
broken and dead, miles away from the places where they had lived.  On
the mountains great hurricanes blew shrieking from peak to peak,
tearing up the largest trees by their roots, and tossing them down into
the fern-strewn gullies far below.  Huge boulders were loosened and
went crashing down; and often a landslip followed them, when all the
soil would be stripped from a hill-side and fall, thundering, carrying
with it hundreds of people and leaving the bare rock behind it, like a
scar upon the side of the mountain.  Thunder and lightning came and
shook the world with terror: mighty trees were riven and shattered, and
fires swept through forest and plain, leaving blackness and desolation
behind.  Then came floods, that covered the low-lying parts of the
earth, and made of the rivers roaring torrents, that ran madly to the
sea.  The world trembled in the terror of the wrath of Pund-jel.

And yet, men had grown so wise and cunning that not very many died.
When the whirlwinds and hurricanes came, they crept into holes in the
hill-sides, or sheltered themselves in deep gullies.  They strengthened
their houses, so that the wind should not blow them away.  Sometimes
they floated down the rivers in bark canoes; and a great number found
refuge in caves.  Those who were killed were the careless ones, who
would not take the trouble to protect themselves against the fury of
the storms, thinking that they would only be ordinary gales; but though
they died, innumerable people were left.

Just for a little while, they were afraid.  They knew they were wicked,
and that Pund-jel must be angry with them; and the thought that
possibly the storms were the message of his wrath made them careful for
awhile.  But as time passed they forgot the storms and whirlwinds, and
the fate of their brothers and sisters who had been killed; and they
went back to their wickedness, becoming worse than they had been before.

And then there came a day when Pund-jel's anger broke anew.

One morning a blackness came out of the sky, and in the blackness a
flame of gleaming fire.  The people clustered together, in terror, and
there were cries of "Pund-jel!  Pund-jel is coming!"  Then the
magic-men began to chatter and make Magic, hoping to turn the wrath of
the Maker of Men; and the people flung themselves upon the ground,
crying aloud, and calling upon the good Spirits to save them.

The blackness swooped down upon the earth.  In the air were strange
whisperings and mutterings, as if even the rustling leaves and the
boughs of the trees were crying, "Pund-jel is coming!"  And then, out
of the glowing heart of the cloud came Pund-jel himself, that he might
see these men and women that he had made.  He spoke no word.  His
glance was like lightnings, playing about the stricken eyes of those
that gazed.  But he trod among the black multitudes, and the noise of
the trampling of his feet shook the earth.

In his hand he carried his great stone knife, and the sight of it was
very terrible.  Those who looked upon it fell back blindly.  But as he
walked on he cut his way among the people, with great sweeps of the
cruel weapon, sparing none that came in his way, and cutting them into
small fragments.  And then the blackness of the cloud received him
again, and hid him from the people of the world.

But the pieces of the slain were not dead.  Each fragment moved, as
Tur-ror, the worm, moves; and from them rose a cry.  It came from the
fragments of those who had been good men and good women, yet who had
met Death at the knife of Pund-jel with the guilty ones.

Then a great and terrible storm came out of the sky, sweeping over the
places where Pund-jel had trod; and with it a whirlwind, that gathered
up the pieces of those who had been men, women and children, and they
became like flakes of snow, white and whirling in the blackness of the
air.  They were carried away into the clouds.

And when they came to where Pund-jel sat, once more looking down upon
the world, he took the flakes that had been bad men and women, and with
his hand scattered them so far over the earth that no man could say
where they fell.  So they passed for ever from the sight of man, and
now they lie in the waste places of the world, where there is neither
light nor day.

But Pund-jel took the snowflakes that had been good men and women, and
he made them into stars.  Right up into the blue sky he flung them; and
the sky caught them and held them fast, and the light of the sun fell
upon them so that they caught some of his brightness.  There they stay
for ever, and you would not know that they are in any way different
from the other stars that twinkle at you on a frosty night when the sky
is all blue and silver.  Only the magic-men, who know everything, can
tell you which among the stars were once good men, women and children,
before Pund-jel left his high seat to punish the wickedness of the
world.




VI

HOW LIGHT CAME

The blacks believed that the earth was quite flat, with the sky arched
above it.  They had an idea that if anyone could get beyond the edge of
the sky he would come to another country, with rivers and trees, where
live the ghosts of all the people who have died.  Some thought that
there was water all round the edge of the earth.  They were taught that
at first the sky had lain flat on the ground, so that neither sun,
moon, nor stars could move, but the magpies came along and propped it
up with long sticks, resting some parts on the mountains near the edge.
And sometimes word was sent from tribe to tribe, saying that the props
were growing rotten, and unless the people sent up tomahawks to cut new
props, the sky would fall.  In its falling it would burst, and all the
people would be drowned.  This used to alarm the blacks greatly, and
they would make the magic-men weave charms so that the sky should not
fall.

At first, all the earth was in darkness; and at that time there lived
among the blacks a man called Dityi.  In his tribe was a very beautiful
woman whose name was Mitjen; and she became Dityi's wife.

At first Dityi and Mitjen were very happy.  They had plenty to eat, and
the camp was warm and comfortable, and they loved each other very much.
There were no white men, at that time: the blacks ruled all their
country, which they thought was the whole world.  The forests were full
of game, and the rivers of fish: every one had enough, so there was no
fighting.  And Dityi thought he was the luckiest man in the world,
because he had won the love of Mitjen.

But a stranger came to the camp: a tall dark-eyed man named Bunjil.  He
told stories of far-away forests and wonderful things to be found
there.  The other blacks used to listen to him, greatly interested; and
no one listened more attentively than Mitjen, for she had a great
longing to see the wonderful places of which Bunjil spoke.  When she
heard him tell stories of these strange lands of the Bush, she burned
to leave her quiet home and go exploring.  Dityi could not understand
this feeling at all.  It interested him to hear Bunjil's tales, but he
had no wish to do more than hear them.  He was very well satisfied with
his life, and thought that his own home was better than any other place
could possibly be.

But Bunjil soon noticed the dark-eyed girl who never lost a word of his
stories.  It amused him to see her face light up and her eyes sparkle
at his talk; and so he told more and more stories, and did not always
trouble to make them true, so long as he could make Mitjen look
interested.  Sometimes he would meet her wandering alone outside the
camp, and then he would tell her, as if he were sorry for her, that
this quiet camp was no place for her at all.  "You are so beautiful,"
he would say, "that you should be far away in my wonderful country,
where you would see many great men and lovely women; but none more
lovely than Mitjen.  In this dull hole you are buried alive."

None of this was true, but Bunjil spoke exactly as if it were, and
after a time Mitjen began to be very discontented.  The simple happy
life in the Bush pleased her no longer; she only wanted the exciting
things of which Bunjil told.  At home, everybody was good to her and
liked her, but she was only a girl who had to obey other people all the
time, and no one but Dityi had ever troubled about telling her that she
was beautiful.  Moreover, she could see that Bunjil did not think much
of Dityi.  He called him one day to Mitjen, "an ignorant black fellow,"
and though Mitjen could not imagine any people who were not black, it
sounded very uncomplimentary, and she could not forget it.  As soon as
he had said it, Bunjil apologized, saying that it was only a slip of
the tongue--but in her heart Mitjen knew this was not true.  It made
her look down on Dityi a little, and wonder if he were really worthy of
her.

One day she asked him if he would take her to Bunjil's country, and his
surprise prevented him from speaking for some time.  He could only look
at her, with his mouth open.

"Go away from home!" he said at last.  "Why?  What is there to go for?"

"To see the world," said Mitjen, tossing her head.  "I do not want to
stay for ever in this weary place."

"But it is the world--or most of it," returned Dityi.  "I do not know
where Bunjil's country is--but the men there cannot be up to much if
they are like him, for he is more useless than anyone I ever saw.  He
cannot throw a boomerang better than a girl, and with a spear I could
beat him with my left hand!"

"You are boastful," said Mitjen coldly.  "Throwing weapons is not
everything."

"Well, I don't know how things are managed in Bunjil's country, but it
is very important in ours that a man should know how to throw," said
Dityi.  "Perhaps Bunjil's game comes close to him to be killed, but
here a man has to hunt it.  Did Bunjil mention if it came ready cooked
too?  I don't suppose you would want to do any work in that country of
his!"

This made Mitjen very angry, and she quarrelled fiercely with Dityi for
making fun of her; and then Dityi lost his temper and beat her a
little, which was quite a usual thing to happen to a woman among the
blacks.  But Mitjen had been told by Bunjil that in his country a man
never raised his hand against a woman.  So it made her furious to be
beaten by Dityi, though he cared for her too much really to hurt her,
and she broke away from him and ran to the camp, sobbing that she hated
him and did not want to see him any more.

Near the camp she met Bunjil, who asked her why she was crying; and
when she told him, he was kind to her, patting her gently, and
pretending to be very angry with Dityi.  He was safe in doing this, for
Dityi had gone off whistling into the Bush--not sorry that he had
beaten Mitjen, if it should make her sensible again, but sorry that she
was unhappy, and resolved to bring her back a snake or something
equally nice for supper.  So Bunjil ran no risk in abusing him, and he
did it heartily.  When they had finished talking, Mitjen walked away
from him into the camp with a very determined face.  She went straight
to her wurley, and though Dityi brought her home a beautiful young
snake and a lace-lizard, she would eat nothing and refused to come out
of the wurley to speak to him.  So Dityi went back to the young men's
huts, angry and offended, and Mitjen lay down, turning her face to the
wall.  She was just as determined; but only her own heart knew how much
she was afraid.

When the people of the camp awoke, she was gone.  Nowhere was there any
trace of her.  And when the blacks went to look for Bunjil, in his
wurley, he was gone, too.  Then they fell into a great rage, and the
young men painted themselves in white stripes with pipeclay, and went
forth in pursuit, carrying all their arms, and led by Dityi.  But
though they looked for many days, they could never come upon a track;
and so at last the other young men gave up the search, and went back to
the camp.  But Dityi did not go back.  There was nothing for him at
home now that he had lost Mitjen; and so he went on, hunting through
the dark forests for his lost love.

Bunjil and Mitjen had fled far into the Bush.  For a long time they
walked in the creek, so that they would leave no tracks, and if they
came to deep holes, they swam them.  They were far away from Mitjen's
country before they dared to leave the water, and already the girl was
tired.  But Bunjil would not let her stop to rest, for he knew that
they would be pursued.  He hurried her on, forgetting now to be gentle
when he spoke to her.

It was not many days before Mitjen realized the terrible mistake she
had made.  They fled deeper and deeper into the Bush, but no wonderful
country came in sight.  She was often cold and hungry, and Bunjil made
her work harder than she had ever worked before, doing not only the
woman's work, but a large share of the man's.  She found out that he
was almost too lazy to get food, and if she had not hunted for game
herself, she would never have had enough to eat.  Bunjil had told her
that he loved her, but very soon she knew that this was not true, and
that all he had wanted was a woman to cook for him and help him procure
food.

At first she used to ask him when they would come to his own country,
and he would put her off, saying, "Presently--pretty soon."  But before
long she found that it made him angry to be asked about it; and at
last, if she spoke of it, he beat her cruelly.  So Mitjen did not ask
any more.

Then all the memories of Dityi and his love came crowding upon her, and
her heart quite broke.  She did not want to live any more.  She lay
down under a big log, and when Bunjil spoke to her there was no answer.
So he kicked her, and left her.  But after he had slept, he went to see
why she lay so still; and he found that she was dead.

As he looked at her, a great storm came out of the Bush and whirled him
away.  It flung him far up in the sky, where you may see him now, if
you look closely: a lonely, wandering star, finding no rest anywhere,
and no mate.  Always he must wander on and on, and never stop, no
matter how tired he may be; and the other stars shrink from him,
hurrying away if they cross his path.

The storm took Mitjen also, and carried her gently into the sky; and
there she saw Dityi, who lit it all up, for he had been turned into the
Sun, and was giving light to the earth.  But always, the blacks say, he
is seeking Mitjen.  Like a great fire, he leaps through the sky,
mourning for his love and going back and forth in ceaseless quest of
her.  His wurley is in Nganat, just over the edge of the earth; and the
bright colour of sunset is caused by the spirits of the dead going in
and out of Nganat, while Dityi looks among them for his lost love.  But
he never finds her; and so next day he begins to hunt again, and goes
tramping across the sky.  Sometimes he shouts her name--"Mitjen!
Mitjen!"--and it is then that we hear Thunder go rolling round the
world.  But Mitjen never answers.

She has been made the Moon, and always she mourns far away and alone.
When she sees the glory of the Sun, and hears his trampling feet, she
hides herself, for now she is ashamed to let him find her.  She only
comes from her hiding-place when he sleeps; and then she hurries
through the sky, so that she may have the comfort of going in his
footsteps, though she knows now that she can never hope to overtake
him.  Sometimes she sighs, and then a soft breeze flutters over the
earth; and the big rain is the tears that relieve her grief.




VII

THE FROG THAT LAUGHED

Before Pund-jel, Maker of Men, peopled the earth with the black tribes,
and very long before the first white man came to Australia, the animals
which inhabited the land fell into a great trouble.  And this is how it
happened.  Old Conara, the black chief, told it to me while we were
fishing for cod in the Murray one hot night; and he had it from his
father, whose mother had told him about it; while to her the story had
come from her grandfather, who said he was a little boy when his
grandfather had told him, saying he had had the story from Conara, the
magpie, after whom he was named.  And the magpies learn everything, so
you see he ought to know.

Conara said that once in the long-ago time, all the animals were living
very cheerfully together, when suddenly all the water disappeared.
They went to sleep with the creeks and swamps full, and the rivers
running; and when they woke up, everything was dry.  Of course, this
was the most terrible thing that could happen to the animals, for
though they can manage with very little food in Australia, at a pinch,
they must always have plenty of water.  They searched everywhere for
it, through the scrub and over the plains; and the birds flew great
distances, always seeking with their eyes for a gleam of water.  But it
had quite gone.

So the animals held a council of war, and Mirran, the Kangaroo, spoke
to them.  At a council, some one must always speak first, to tell those
present what they know already; and Mirran did this very thoroughly, so
that little Kur-bo-roo, the Native Bear, went to sleep and began to
climb up the legs of the Emu in his sleep, thinking she was a tree.
This led to a disturbance, and it was some time before Mirran could go
on again with his speech.  Then he found he had forgotten the rest of
what he meant to say, so he contented himself by asking them all what
they meant to do about it, and remarking that the matter was now open
for discussion.  This is a remark often made at meetings.

Then Mirran sat down thankfully, but in his relief at finishing his
speech he sat on Kowern, the Porcupine; and Kowern is the most
uncomfortable seat in the Bush.  Mirran got up more quickly than he had
sat down, and again there was disorder in the meeting, especially as
the Jackass was unfeeling enough to laugh.

When matters were more quiet, Kellelek, the Cockatoo, made a long
speech, but it was hard to understand what he said, because all his
brothers would persist in speaking at the same time.  Every one knew
that he wanted water, but as every one was in the same fix, it did not
seem to help along matters to have him say so.  Booran, the Pelican,
was even more troubled about it than Kellelek, for of course he lived
on the water, and he wanted fish badly.  All the fish had disappeared,
and the eels had buried themselves deep in the soft mud of the beds of
the rivers and creeks, and none of the water-fowl had any food.  The
Red Wallaby, Waat, and old Warreen, the bad-tempered Wombat, made
speeches, and so did Meri, the black Dingo, and Tonga, the 'Possum, and
a great many other animals.  But not one could suggest any means of
getting water back, or form an idea as to how it had gone away.

They were all talking together, getting rather hot and excited, and
very thirsty, when they heard a sudden whirr of wings overhead, and a
bird came dropping down into their midst.  It was Tarook, the Sea Gull,
and though at first they were inclined to be angry at his sudden
appearance, they soon saw that he had news to communicate, and so they
crowded round him and begged him to speak.  Tarook was a proud bird,
and did not often leave his beloved sea; so they knew that something
important must have brought him so far inshore.

He stood in their midst, dainty and handsome, with his snowy feathers
and scarlet legs, and carefully brushed a fragment of grass from his
wing before replying.

"Waga, the Fish-Hawk, came along this morning--in a shocking temper,
too--and told me of your difficulties," he said.  "Well, we of the sea
know what has caused them!"

There was an instant hubbub.  All the animals and birds cried out at
once, saying, "What is it?"  Tarook looked at them all calmly.

"If you make such a clatter, how can I tell you?" he asked crossly.  "I
have not much time either, because my mate and I have youngsters to
look after, and it is nearly time I got back to find their dinner."

The animals became silent at once, and looked at him anxiously.

"Three nights ago," said Tarook, "Tat-e-lak, the big Frog, came out of
the sea.  Every one knows he lives there, but none of us had ever seen
him--and he is as large as many wurleys.  All the sea was troubled at
his coming, and big waves rolled in and beat upon the shore, so that we
could scarcely see the rocks for spray.  A hollow booming sound came
from under the sea, and all our young ones were very much alarmed.
Then a wave larger than all the rest put together crashed into the
beach, and when it began to roll back we saw Tat-e-lak waddling up the
shore.  Most frogs hop, but he is so huge that he gets along in a kind
of shuffle."

"But where did he go?" cried Kadin, the Inguana-lizard.

"He waddled away into the plains beyond, and when I flew in to look for
him, for awhile I could not find him.  Then I heard a strange noise of
water sucking, and I flew to where it came from.  There was a hollow in
the creek bank, and Tat-e-lak was sitting there, with his head in the
water, sucking it all up; and as he sucked, he swelled.  It was not a
nice sight, and soon I flew away."

"But where is he now?  And what did he do?" asked the animals anxiously.

"I did not watch him any more.  But the West Wind knows all about him,
and he told me when I was out fishing last night.  It seems that
Tat-e-lak lives under the sea, because of his former sins, and that is
why he has grown so huge.  But he always wants to come back to land,
and sometimes he breaks away from his prison under the sea and gets up
to the surface--and a great stir his coming makes: it's very annoying
if you're fishing, for it scares all the fish away into the farthest
corners of the rocks.  But the salt water he has drunk for so long
makes him terribly thirsty, and unless he can get fresh water to drink
he has to go back to his sea-prison."

"Then that is why he has drunk all of ours!" cried the animals.

Tarook nodded very hard.

"Yes," he said.  "It is very seldom that he gets a chance of coming up;
and his last three landings have been made in the desert, where he has
had no water at all, and has been forced to hurry back meekly to the
sea.  So he is now more thirsty than he ever was before.  The West Wind
says he did not stop drinking until this morning--and now there is no
water anywhere, as you know."

"Then how shall we ever get any more?  Are we to die of thirst?"

"Well, that I do not know.  I have told you all that I know," said
Tarook.  "Tat-e-lak is somewhere on shore, and so far as I can tell,
all the water is inside him.  But I do not know where he is, nor if you
can do anything.  Now I must go back to my young ones, for they will
certainly be hungry, and my mate will be cross."  He bowed to the
Kangaroo, and flew up into the air.  Then he went skimming over the
forest to the sea.

When he had gone, the animals talked again, but there was great grief
among them, and they did not know what to do.  At last it was agreed
that Malian, the Eaglehawk, should fly to the shore and find out
anything he could about Tat-e-lak.  So huge a Frog, they thought, could
not hide himself from the eyes of an Eaglehawk, which can see even a
little shrew-mouse in the grass as he flies.  So Mirran, the Kangaroo,
bade Malian be as quick as possible, and he flew off, while all the
people awaited his return as patiently as they could.  But they were
too thirsty to be very patient.

It was evening when Malian returned.  The day had seemed very long, and
he was tired, for it is not easy to fly for a long while without water.

"Tat-e-lak is the most terrible Frog you could imagine," he said.  "He
is squatting on a rise not far from the sea, and he has drunk so much
that he cannot move.  His body is swelled up so that he is bigger than
anything that ever existed: bigger than the little hill on which he
sits.  Nothing could possibly be so large as he is.  He does not speak
at all."

"But what is to be done?" cried the other animals.

"I asked every one I met, but they could not tell me.  So at last I
found old Blook, the Bullfrog, for it struck me that he would know more
of the ways of other Frogs than anyone else.  I found him with great
difficulty, and for a long time he was too angry to speak, for he has
now no water to remain in, and none to drink.  But he knows all about
Tat-e-lak.  He says that now he has inside him all the waters that
should cover the waste places of the earth, but that we shall never
have water unless he can be made to laugh!"

"To laugh!" cried the animals.  "Who can make a Frog laugh?"

"Blook knows he cannot, so that is why he is angry," answered Malian.
"But that is the only way.  If Tat-e-lak laughs, all the water will run
out of his mouth, and there will once more be plenty for every one.
But unless he laughs he will sit there for ever, unable to move; and
soon we shall all die of thirst."

The animals talked over this bad news for a long time, and at last they
agreed that every one who could be at all funny must go and try to make
Tat-e-lak laugh.  A great many at once said that they could be funny;
but when they were tried, their performances were so dull that most of
those who looked on were quite annoyed, and refused to let them go near
the Frog, for fear he should lose his temper instead of laughing.
However, every one was too thirsty to wait to try all those willing to
undertake to make him merry: and they set off through the Bush in a
queer company, the animals running, hopping or walking, the snakes and
reptiles crawling, and the birds flying overhead.  "The water will run
back to you before we do!" they cried to the wives and young ones they
were leaving behind.  But that was just a piece of brave talk, for in
reality they did not feel at all sure about it.  They hurried through
the scrub, getting more and more scattered as they went along, for the
swift ones would not wait for those who were slower.  In the early
morning the leaders came out of the trees, and found themselves on a
swampy plain leading to the sea.  All the water had dried up, and a
creek that had its course through it was also dry.  It was a very
dreary-looking place.

Not far from the beach there was a little hill; and, sitting on it,
they saw the monster Frog.  He was a terrible creature in appearance,
for he was so immense that the hill was lost under him, just like a
hugely fat man sitting on a button mushroom.  He was so swelled up that
it seemed that if anything pricked him he would burst like a balloon;
but when they came near him they saw how thick his skin was, and knew
that no prick would go through it.  His beady eyes were bulging out,
and though they tried to attract his attention, he only gazed out to
sea and took no notice of them at all.

"Well, he has certainly had a great drink, but he does not look as if
he had enjoyed it," remarked Mirran, hopping round him.

"I should think he would find himself more comfortable under the sea
than sitting on that poor little hill!" said Merkein, the Jackass.

"He will probably go back to the sea," the Native Companion answered.
"Let us hope he will not take all the water with him."

"How uncomfortable he must be!--why, he is like a mountain!" hissed
Mumung, the Black Snake.  "May I not go and bite him?"

"Certainly not!" said Mirran hastily.  "It might make him angry; or he
might die, and we do not want the water poisoned.  Unless you can make
him laugh, you had better get into your hole!"  So Mumung subsided,
muttering angrily to himself.

Then the animals began to try to make the Frog laugh.  It was the first
circus that ever was in Australia.  They danced and capered and pranced
before him, and the birds sang him the most ridiculous songs they could
think of, and the insects sat on his head and told him the funniest
stories they had gathered in flying round the world: but he did not
take the smallest notice of any of them.  His bulging eyes saw them
all, but not a word did he say.

It is very hard to be funny when nobody laughs, and the animals soon
became rather disheartened.  But Mirran would not let them stop.  He
himself did most wonderful jumps before the Frog, and once hopped right
over the Emu, who looked so comical when she saw the great body sailing
over her that all the animals burst out laughing; but the Frog merely
looked as though he would like to go to sleep.  Then Menak, the
Bandicoot, brought his brothers, and performed all kinds of antics; and
the 'Possums climbed up a little tree and hung from its boughs, and
were very funny in their gymnastics; and the Dingo and his tribe held a
coursing match round the hill on which the Frog sat, going so fast that
no one could see where one yellow dog ended and the next began; but
none of these things amused the Frog at all.  He stared straight in
front of him, and, if possible, he looked a little more bulgy.  But
that was all.

The animals held another council, and tried to think of other funny
things.  Mirran remembered how the Jackass had laughed when he had sat
down on Kowern, the Porcupine, and though that had been a most
unpleasant experience for him, he bravely offered to do it again.
Kowern, however, did not like the idea, and scuttled away into a hole,
and they had great difficulty in finding him--and when they did find
him, it was quite another matter to make him come out.  At last they
induced him to appear, and to let Mirran sit on him.  But it was not a
successful experiment.  Perhaps Mirran was nervous, for he knew how it
felt to sit on Kowern's quills; and so he let himself down gently, and
Kowern gave a heavy groan, but no one even smiled.  As for the Frog, he
was heard to snore.  It was all rather hard on Mirran, for the
experiment hurt him just as much as if it had been quite successful.

So the day went on, and when it was nearly evening, the animals could
do no more: and still Tat-e-lak sat and stared stupidly before him, and
looked more and more huge and bulgy in the gathering darkness; and
Waat, the Red Wallaby, declared that the little hill he sat on was
beginning to flatten under his weight.  They were quite hopeless, at
last.  All were so tired and thirsty that they could not have attempted
more antics, even had they known any, but, indeed, they had done
everything they knew.  They sat in a half-circle round the great Frog
and looked at him sadly; and the Frog sat on his hill and did not look
at anything at all.

Just about this time, Noy-Yang, the great Eel, woke up.  He was lying
in a deep crack in the muddy bed of the creek, and when the mud dried
and hardened it pinched him, and he squirmed and woke.  To his
surprise, there was no water anywhere.  Noy-Yang wriggled out of his
crack, very astonished and indignant.

He found all the creek-bed dry, as you know; so he wriggled across it
and up the bank, and came out on a little mud-flat by the sea.  There
he looked about him.  On one side the sea rippled, but Noy-Yang knew
that its water was no good for him.  On the other was only dry
land--the swampy ground he knew and loved, but now there was no water
in it.  It was very puzzling to a sleepy Eel.

He looked a little farther and saw the great Frog sitting on his hill.
But he looked so huge that Noy-Yang thought the hill had simply grown
bigger while he slept; and though that was surprising, it was not
nearly so surprising as finding no water.  Then he saw all the animals
sitting about him, but he took no notice of them.  All he cared for was
to get away from this hot, dry mud, and find a cool creek running over
its soft bed.

So he wriggled on, making very good time across the flat.  Nobody saw
him, for all the animals were looking miserably at the Frog.

Kowern, the Porcupine, had felt very sore and bruised after Mirran had
sat on him for the second time.  He was a sulky fellow, and he did not
want to be sat on any more, even if it were for the good of all the
people.  "Mirran will be making a habit of this soon," he said crossly;
"I will get out of the way."  So he hurried off, and got into the
nearest hole, which happened to be near the edge of the mud-flat.
There he went to sleep.

Noy-Yang came wriggling along, hating the hard ground, and only wanting
to get to a decent creek.  He was in such a hurry that he did not see
Kowern, and he wiggled right across him--and it seemed to him that each
of Kowern's spines found a different place in his soft body.

Noy-Yang cried out very loudly and threw himself backwards to get off
those dreadful spikes.  He was too sore to creep at all: the only part
of him that was not hurt was the very point of his tail, and he stood
up on that and danced about in his wrath and pain, with his body
wriggling in the air, and his mouth wide open.  And when the monster
Frog caught sight of the Eel dancing on his tail on the mud-flat, he
opened his mouth and let out such a great shout of laughter as had
never been heard before in the world or will ever be heard again.

Then all the waters came rushing out of the Frog's mouth, and in a
moment the dry swamp was filled with it, and a sheet of water rushed
over the mud-flat where Noy-Yang was dancing, and carried him
away--which was exactly what Noy-Yang liked, and made him forget all
his sores.  It was not so nice for Kowern, the Porcupine, for he was
swept away, too, and as he could not swim, he was drowned.  But he was
so bad-tempered that nobody cared very much.

Tat-e-lak went on laughing, and the water kept pouring out of his open
mouth; and as he laughed he shrank and shrank, and his skin became
flabby and hung in folds about him.  He shrank until he was only as
large as a few ordinary frogs put together: and then he gave a loud
croak, and dived off into the water.  He swam away, and none of the
animals ever saw him again.

At that moment the animals were much too busy with their own affairs to
think much about Tat-e-lak.  When the water first appeared they rushed
at it eagerly, and each drank as much as he could.  Then they felt
better, and looked about them.  Mirran, the Kangaroo, was the first to
make a discovery.

"Ky!  It will be a flood!" said he.

"A flood--nonsense!" said Warreen, the Wombat.  "Why, ten minutes ago
it was a drought!"

"Yes, and now it will be a flood," said Mirran, watching keenly.
"Look!"

The water had run all over the plain, filling up the swamp, and already
the creek showed like a line of silver where but a few moments ago
there had been only dry mud.  But it was plain that the water could not
get away quickly enough.  All the plain was like a sea, and there were
big waves washing round the little hills.

"Save yourselves!" cried Mirran, to the people.  "Soon there will be no
dry land at all!"

He set off with great bounds, thinking of his mate and the little ones
he had left in the forest.  Behind him came all the people, running,
jumping and crawling; and behind them came the water, in one great
wave.  Some reached the high ground of the forest first, and found
safety, and others took refuge on hills, while those that could climb
fled up trees.  But many could not get away quickly, and the waters
caught them, and they were drowned.

Next morning the animals who were saved gathered at the edge of the
forest and looked over the flood.  It stretched quite across the plain,
and between it and the sea was only the yellow line of the
sand-hummocks.  Nearer to the forest were a few little hills, and on
these could be seen forlorn figures, huddling together for warmth--for
the air had become very cold.

"There are some of our people!" cried Mirran in a loud voice.  "How are
we to rescue them?"

No one could answer this question.  None of the animals could swim, and
if they had been able to do so, they had still no way of getting the
castaways to dry land.  They could only look at them and weep because
they were so helpless.

After awhile, Booran, the Pelican, came flying up, in a state of great
excitement.

"Have you seen them?" he cried.  "Waat is there, and little Tonga, the
'Possum, and old Warreen, and a lot of others; and soon they will die
of cold and hunger if they are not saved.  So I must save them."

"You!" said all the animals.

"There's no need to say it in that tone!" said Booran angrily.  "I can
make a canoe and sail over quite easily.  It will please me very much
to save the poor things."

So Booran cut a big bark canoe, which he called Gre.  He was very proud
of it, and would not let anyone touch it or help him at all; and when
it was finished he got in and paddled over to the little islands where
the animals shivered and shook, with soaked fur and heavy hearts.  They
grew excited when they saw Booran coming, and when he arrived, with his
canoe, they nearly tipped it over by all trying to get in at once.
This was repeated at each island, and at last Booran lost his temper
altogether and threatened to leave them all where they were.  This
dreadful idea made them very meek, and they were quite silent as Booran
paddled them towards the shore.

Now, Booran had not a pleasant nature.  It did not suit him to find
people meek, for it at once made him conceited and inclined to be a
bully.  He felt very important, to be taking so many animals back in
his boat; and so he began to say rude things to them, and in every way
to be unpleasant.  The animals bore this quietly for a time, for they
were too cold to want to dispute with him, and besides, they were
really very grateful for being saved.  But after a while, he became so
overbearing that Waat, the Red Wallaby, answered him back sharply, and
others joined in.  Before they got to shore, they were all quarrelling
violently, and when they had only a few yards to go Booran suddenly
stopped paddling, and jumped out so quickly that he upset the canoe,
and threw all the animals into the water.  He swam off, chuckling, and
saying, "That will help to cool your bad tempers!"

The water was not deep, and the animals escaped with only a ducking.
They struggled to the dry land, very wet and miserable.

"That was a mean trick to play on us," said little Tonga, his teeth
chattering.  "I would like to fight Booran, if only he would come
ashore.  But he will keep out of our way now."

"Ky!  Look at him!" said Waat.

They looked, and they saw Booran coming in rapidly, as though he were
floating on the water, and had no power to stop himself.  His eyes were
fixed and glassy, and his great beak wide open.  A wave brought him
right up on the shore, and blew over him in a cloud of spray.  When the
spray had gone, Booran had gone, too; and where he had lain on the bank
was a big rock, shaped something like a pelican.

That was the story old Conara told me, as we fished for Murray cod
together.  He said that all his people knew the rock, and called it the
Pelican Rock; and it stood on the plain long after Booran and his
children's children's children were almost forgotten.  To-day the plain
is dry, and no water ever lodges there; but when the blacks see the
Pelican Rock they think of the time when it was all in flood, when
Tat-e-lak, the great Frog, nearly caused all the animals to die of
thirst, and when Noy-Yang, the Eel, saved them by dancing on his tail
on a mud-flat by the sea.




VIII

THE MAIDEN WHO FOUND THE MOON

CHAPTER I

Very long ago, before the white man came to conquer the land, a tribe
of black people lived in a great forest.  Beyond their country was a
range of mountains which separated them from another tribe of fierce
and warlike blacks, and on one side they were bounded by the sea.  They
were a prosperous tribe, for not only was there plenty of game in the
forest, to give them food and rugs of skins for clothing, but the sea
gave them fish: and fish were useful both to eat and for their bones.
The blacks made many things out of fish-bones, and found them very
useful for tipping spears and other weapons.

Being so powerful a tribe, they were not much molested by other blacks.
The mountains to the north were their chief protection.  No wandering
parties of fighting men were likely to cross them and surprise the
tribe, for they were steep and rugged and full of ravines and deep
gullies that were difficult to cross, unless you knew the right tracks.
The nearest tribe had come over more than once, and great battles had
taken place; but the sea-tribe was always prepared, for the noise of
their coming was too great to be hidden.  There had been great fights,
but the sea-tribe had always won.  Now they were too strong to fear any
attack.  So strong were they, indeed, that they did not trouble about
fighting, but only wished to be peaceful.  Their life was a very simple
and happy one, and they did not want anything better.

The tribe was called the Baringa tribe, and the name of its chief was
Wadaro.  He was a tall, silent man, very proud of his people and their
country, and of his six big sons--all strong fighting-men, like
himself--but most of all, he was proud of his daughter, Miraga.

Miraga was just of woman's age, and no girl in all the tribe was so
beautiful.  She was straight and supple as a young sapling, lissom as
the tendrils of the clematis, and beautiful as the dawn striking on the
face of the waters.  Her deep eyes were full of light, and she was
always merry.  The little children loved her, and used to bring her
blossoms of the red native fuchsia, to twine in her glossy black hair.

Most blacks, men and women, look on everything they meet with one
thought.  They ask, "Is it good to eat?"  But Miraga was different.
She had made friends with many of the little animals of the Bush, and
they were her playmates: bandicoots, shrew-mice, pouch-mice,
kangaroo-rats, and other tiny things.  They were quite easy to tame, if
anyone tried; even snappy little Yikaura, the native cat, with its
spotted body and fierce sharp head, became quite gentle with Miraga,
and did not try to touch her other pets.  She begged the tribe not to
eat the animals she loved, and they consented.  Of course, in many
tribes it would have been necessary to go on using them for food, and
any woman who tried to save them would only have been laughed at.  But
the Baringa folk had so much food that they could easily afford to
spare these little furry things.  Besides, it was Miraga who asked, and
was she not the chief's daughter?

However, it was not only because she was the chief's daughter that the
people loved Miraga and did what she asked them.  She was always kind
and merry, and went about the camp singing happily, generally with a
cluster of children running after her.  If anyone were sick she was
very good, bringing food and medicines.  Being the daughter of Wadaro,
the chief, she might have escaped all work; but instead, she did her
share, and used to go out digging for yams and other roots with the
other girls of the tribe, the happiest of them all.

The tribe beyond the northern hills was called the Burrin.  They were
very fierce and had many fighting-men; but their country was not so
good as that of the Baringa, and they were very jealous of the happy
sea-tribe.  One time they came to the conclusion that it was long since
they had had a fight--and that it would be a very good thing to try and
win the Baringa country.  They did not want to go over the mountains
unprepared.  So they sent a picked band of young men, telling them to
cross into the land of the Baringas and find out if they were very
strong, and if there were still much game in the forest.  They were not
to fight, but only to prowl in the forest and watch the sea-tribe
stealthily.  Then they were to return over the mountains with their
report, so that the head-men of the Burrin could decide whether it were
wise to send all their fighting-men over to try and conquer the Baringa.

The little band of Burrin men set off with great pride.  Their leader
was the chief's son, Yurong, who was stronger than any man of his
tribe, and of a very fierce and cruel nature.  He was not yet married,
although that was only due to an accident.  Once he had been about to
take a wife, and had gone to her camp and hit her on the head with a
waddy, which was one of the blacks' customs in some tribes, before
carrying her to his own wurley.  But he hit too hard, and the poor girl
died--which caused Yurong a great deal of inconvenience, because her
parents wanted to kill him too.  It was only because he was the chief's
son that he escaped with his life.  Now he was still unmarried, because
no girl would look at him.  It made Yurong more bad-tempered than he
was naturally, and that is saying a good deal.  He had great hopes from
the expedition into the Baringa country.  If he came back successful,
and won a name for himself as a fighter, he thought that all the
maidens of his tribe would admire him, and forget that he had been so
ready with his stick when he was betrothed first.

Yurong and his band left the plain where the Burrin tribe roamed, and
journeyed over the mountains.  They did not find any great
difficulties, for they had been told where to find the best tracks, and
they had scarcely any loads to hamper them.  It was summer-time, and
the lightest of rugs served them for covering at night, even in the
keener air of the hills.  There was no difficulty in finding food or
water, and the stars were their guides.

When they came to the country of the Baringas they went very
cautiously, for they did not wish to encounter any of Wadaro's men.  In
the daytime they hid themselves in gullies or in bends of the creek,
only coming out when their scouts knew that no enemies were near; but
at night they travelled fast, and before long they climbed up a great
hill that lay across their path, and from its topmost peak they saw the
gleaming line of the sea.  Then, watching, they saw camp-fire smoke
drifting over the trees; and they knew they had found Wadaro's camp.

They became more careful than ever, knowing that now was their greatest
danger.  Sometimes they hid in trees, or in caves in the rocks, all the
time watching, and noting in their memories the number of the men they
saw and the signs of abundance of game.  There was no doubt that this
was a far better country than their own, and they thirsted to possess
it.  At the same time they could see how strong the Baringas were.
Even their womenfolk were tall and straight and strong, and would help
to fight for their land and their freedom.  The Burrin men used to see
them when they went out to dig in the Bush, a merry, laughing band.
Always with them was a beautiful girl with red flowers in her hair.
Yurong would watch her closely from his hiding-place, and he made up
his mind that when the fighting was over this girl should be the chief
part of his share of the spoils.  He was so conceited that he never
dreamed that his tribe would not win.

But misfortune fell upon Yurong and his little band.  They were
prowling round the outskirts of Wadaro's camp one night when a woman,
hushing her crying baby to sleep, caught a glimpse of the black forms
flitting among the trees.  She gave the alarm silently, and silently
the fighting-men of the Baringas hurled themselves upon the intruders.
There was no time to flee: the Burrin men fought fiercely, knowing that
escape was hopeless.  One by one, they were killed.

Yurong was the last left alive.  He turned and ran, when the last of
his comrades fell, a dozen Baringas at his heels.  The first he slew,
turning on him and striking him down; then he ran on wildly, hearing
behind him the hard breathing of the pursuing warriors.

Suddenly the ground under his feet gave way.  He fell, down, down, into
blackness, shouting as he went; then he struck icy water with a great
splash.  When he came to the surface he could see the moonlight far
above him, and hear the voices of the Baringa men, loud and excited.
Then he went under once more.

On the river-bank, steep and lofty, the Baringas watched the black pool
where Yurong had disappeared.  There was no sign of life there.

"He is gone," they said at last.  "No man ever came alive out of that
place.  Well, it is a good thing."  They watched awhile longer, and
then turned back to the camp, where songs of victory were ringing out
among the trees.



CHAPTER II

But Yurong did not die.

When he sank for the second time, he did it on purpose.  The fall had
not hurt him, and his mind worked quickly, for he knew that only
cunning could save him.  He swam under water for a few moments, letting
himself go with the current.  But presently a kind of eddy dragged him
down, and he found himself against a wall of rock, which blocked the
way, so that there seemed to be no escape.  But even in his agony he
remembered that so long as the current ran there must be some way out;
and he dived deeply into the eddy.  It took him through a hole in the
rock, far under the water, scraping him cruelly against the edges; but
still, he was through, and on the other side he rose, gasping.  Here
the river was wider and shallower, and not so swift.  Yurong let it
carry him for awhile; then he scrambled out on one side, and found a
hiding-place under a great boulder.  He rubbed himself down with
rushes, shivering.  Then, crouching in his hole, he slept.

When he awoke, he knew that now he should not lose a moment in getting
back to his tribe.  He had learned the fighting strength of the
Baringas, with all else that he had come to find out; but, besides
that, he had now the deaths of his comrades to avenge.  And yet, three
days later, Yurong was still in hiding near the enemy's camp.  He had
made up his wicked mind that when he went away he would take with him
the beautiful girl he had so often seen in the forest with her
companions.

Quite unconscious of her danger, Miraga went about her daily work.  The
sight of her, and the beauty of her, burned into Yurong's brain; often
in the forest he dogged her footsteps, but the other girls were always
near her, and he dared not try to carry her away.  He knew now she was
the chief's daughter, and he smiled to think that through her he could
deal the cruellest blow to Wadaro, besides gaining for himself the
loveliest wife in all the Bush.

But out in the scrub the girls clustered about Miraga, and in the camp
the young men were never far from her.  There was not one of them who
would not have gladly taken her as his bride, but she told her father
that she was too young to think of being married, and Wadaro was glad
enough to keep her by his side.  But Yurong, fiercely jealous, could
see that there was one man on whom Miraga's eyes would often turn when
he was not looking in her direction--a tall fellow named Konawarr--the
Swan--who loved her so dearly that indeed he scarcely gave her a chance
to look at him, since he so rarely took his gaze from her!  He was the
leader of the young fighting-men, and a great hunter; and Yurong
thirsted to kill him, as the kangaroos thirst for the creeks in summer,
when Drought has laid his withering hand upon the waters.

So five days went by.  In the forest Yurong hid, living on very little
food--for he dared not often go hunting--and always watching the camp;
and Miraga, never dreaming of the danger near her, lived her simple,
happy life.  The children always thronged round her when she moved
about the camp, and she would pause to fondle the little naked black
babies that tumbled round the wurleys, tossing them in the air until
they shouted with laughter.  Yurong saw with amazement how the little
animals came to her and played at her feet, and it impressed him
greatly with a sense of the wealth of the Baringa tribe.  "Ky!" he said
to himself, "they are able to use food for playthings!"  Never before
had he dreamed of such a thing.

One evening the girls went out into the scrub, yam-digging, each
carrying her yam-stick and dilly-bag--the netted bag into which the
black women put everything, from food to nose-ornaments.  Miraga's was
woven of red and white rushes, with a quaint pattern on one side, and
she was very proud of it, for it had been Konawarr's gift.  She was
thinking of his kind eyes as she walked through the trees, brushing
aside tendrils of starry clematis and wild convolvulus, and finding a
way through musk and hazel thickets.  He had looked at her very gently
when he gave her the bag, and she knew that she could trust him.  She
was very happy as she wandered on--so happy that she did not notice for
a while that she had strayed some distance from the other girls, and
that already the shadows were creeping about the forest to make the
darkness.

"I am too far from camp," she said aloud.  "I must hurry back, or my
father will be angry."

She turned to retrace her steps, pausing a moment to make sure of her
direction.  Then, from the gloom of a tall clump of dogwood, something
sprang upon her and seized her.  She struggled, sending a stifled cry
into the forest--but it died as a heavy blow from a waddy took away her
senses.  Yurong carried her swiftly away.

Day came, and found them still fleeing, Miraga a helpless burden in her
captor's arms.  Days and nights passed, and still they travelled
northwards, across the rivers, the forest, and the mountains.  They
went slowly, for at length Yurong could carry the girl no farther, and
at first she was too weak to walk much.  Even when she grew stronger
she still pretended to be weak, doing all in her power to delay their
flight--always straining her ears in the wild hope that behind her she
might hear the feet of the men coming to save her--led by Wadaro and by
Konawarr.  Somewhere, she knew, they were searching for her.  But as
the days went by, and no help came, her heart began to sink hopelessly.

Yurong was not unkind to her.  He treated her gently enough, telling
her she was to be his wife, but she hated him more and more deeply each
hour.  Thinking her very weak, he let her travel slowly, and helped her
over the rough places, though she shrank from his touch.  But he took
no risks with her.  He kept his weapons carefully out of her reach, and
at night, when they slept, he bound her feet and hands with strips of
kangaroo-hide, so that she might not try to escape.

Then they came to the topmost crest of the mountains, and below them
Yurong could see the country of his people.  At that, Miraga gave up
all hope.  They camped on the ridge that night; and for the first time
she sobbed herself to sleep.

She woke up a while later, with a sound of little whispers in her ears.
It was quite dark inside the wurley; but she heard a patter of tiny,
scurrying feet, and a few faint squeaks.  Miraga lay very still,
trembling.  Then a shrill little voice came, very close to her.

"Mistress--oh, mistress!"

"Who is it?" she whispered.

"We are your Little People," came the faint voice.  "Lie very still,
and we will set you free!"

On her hand, Miraga felt a patter of tiny feet, like snowflakes
falling.  They ran all over her body; she felt them down at her bare
ankles, and near her face.  She knew them now, though it was
dark--little Padi-padi, the pouch-mouse, and Punta, the shrew-mouse,
and Kanungo, the kangaroo-rat, with the bandicoot, Talka.  They were
all her friends--her Little People.  Dozens of them seemed to be there
in the dark, nibbling furiously at the strips of hide on her wrists and
ankles.

How long the time seemed as she lay, trembling, in great fear lest
Yurong should awaken!  The very sound of her own breathing was loud in
her ears, and the faint rustlings of the Little People seemed a noise
that must surely wake the sleeping warrior.  But Yurong was tired, and
he slept soundly: and the Little People worked hard.  At last the bonds
fell apart and she was free.

Gliding like a snake, she crept out of the wurley, and ran swiftly into
the forest that clothed the mountains.  But scarcely had she gone when
Yurong woke and found she was not there.

He sprang to his feet with a shout, grasping his weapons, and rushed
outside.  There was no sign of Miraga--but his quick ear caught the
sound of a breaking twig in the forest, and he raced in pursuit.  Again
he heard it, this time so close that he knew she could not be more than
a few yards away.  Then he found himself suddenly on the edge of a
great wall of rock, and there was no time to stop.  He shouted again,
in despair, as he fell--down, down.  Then no more sounds came.

But just on the edge of the precipice three bandicoots came out of a
heap of dry sticks, laughing.

"That was easily done," said one.  "It was only necessary to jump up
and down among the sticks and break a few, and the silly fellow made
sure it was Miraga."

"Well, he will not make any more foolish mistakes," said his brother.
"But is it not surprising to find how simple these humans are!"

"All but our mistress," the first said.  "Come--we must make haste to
follow her, or else we shall have another long hunt.  And nobody knows
what mischief she may fall into, if we are not there to look after her!"



CHAPTER III

Miraga ran swiftly into the heart of the forest, glancing back in
terror, lest at any moment she should see Yurong.  She heard him shout,
and the crash of his feet in pursuit as he plunged out of the wurley;
and for a moment she gave herself up for lost.  He was so swift and so
strong: she knew that she could never escape him, once he was on her
track.

Another cry reached her presently, not so close.  It gave her her first
throb of hope that Yurong had taken the wrong turning among the trees.
Still she was far too terrified to slacken speed.  She fled on, not
knowing where she was going.

A great mountain peak loomed before her, and she fled up it.  It was
hard climbing, but it seemed to her safer than the dark forest, where
at any moment Yurong's black face might appear.  Here, at least, she
might be safe; at least, he would not think of looking for her in this
wild and rugged place.  Perhaps, if she hid on the mountain for a few
days he would grow tired of looking for her, and go away, back to his
own people; and then she could try to find her way home.  At the very
thought of home, poor Miraga sobbed as she ran: it seemed so long since
the happy days in the camp by the sea.

The way was strange.  She climbed up, among great boulders and jagged
crags of rock.  Above her the peaks seemed to pierce the sky.  Deep
ravines were here and there, and she started away from their edges:
somewhere, water fell swiftly, racing down some narrow bed among the
rocks.  So she went on, and the moonlight grew stronger and stronger,
until it flooded all the mountain.  She fought her way, step by step,
up the last great peak.  And, suddenly, in the midnight, she came out
upon a great and shining tableland: then she knew that in her
journeyings she had found the Moon!

[Illustration: "Then she knew that in her journeyings she had found the
Moon!"]

She wandered on, in doubt and fear--fear, not of this strange new land,
but of the men she dreaded to find there.  But for a long time she saw
no people.  Only in the dim hours, when the earth-world glowed like a
star, but all the moon-country was dark, there came about her the
Little People that she knew and loved--Padi-padi, and Punta, Talka and
Kanungo.  And because she was very lonely, and a lonely woman loves the
touch of something small and soft, she took some of them up and carried
them with her in her dilly-bag.

"How did you know I was lost?" she asked them.

"How did we know?" they said, laughing at her.  "Why, all the forest
sang of it!  The magpie chattered it in the dewy mornings, and
Moko-Moko, the Bell-Bird, told all about it to the creeks in the
gullies.  Moko-Moko would not leave his quiet places to tell the other
animals, but he knew the creeks would carry the story.  Soon there was
no animal in all the Bush that did not know where you had gone.  Only
we could not tell your own stupid people, for they would not
understand."

"And are they looking for me?" Miraga asked.

"They seek for you night and day.  Your father has led a party of
fighting-men to the east, and Konawarr has gone north with all his
friends.  They never rest--all the time they seek you.  And the women
are wailing in the camp, and the little children crying, because you
are gone."

That made Miraga cry, too.

"Can you not take me back?" she begged.  "I can go if you will show me
the way."

But the Little People shook their heads.

"No, we cannot do that," they said.  "We can help you, and we can talk
to you, but we may not take you back.  You must find the way yourself."

So Miraga wandered on through the Moon-Country.  It was very desolate
and bare, strewn with rocks and craggy boulders, and to walk long upon
it was hard for naked feet.  There were no rivers, and no creeks, but a
range of mountains rose in one place, and were so grim and terrible
that Miraga would not try to climb them.  She found stunted trees,
bearing berries, which she ate, for she was very hungry.

"Perhaps they are poisonous, and will kill me," she said.  "I do not
think that greatly matters, for I begin to feel that I shall never get
home."

But the berries were not poisonous.  Indeed, Miraga felt better when
she had eaten them.  Her strength came back to her, and her limbs grew
less weary.  She put some of the berries into her dilly-bag for the
Little People.  Then she set off on her wanderings again.

She did not know how long she had been in the Moon-Country, after a
while.  It seemed that she had never done anything but find her way
across its rugged plains, seeking ever for the track back to the green
Earth-World.  So silent and strange was it that she began to think
there was no living being upon it but herself and the Little People she
carried with her.

One day, wandering along a rocky edge, she quite suddenly came upon the
camp of the Man-Who-Dwells-In-The-Moon.  She cried out in fear, and
fled.  But he was awake, and when he saw this beautiful girl, he rose
and gave chase.

But Miraga was fleet of foot; and the Man-Who-Dwells-In-The-Moon was a
fat man, and heavy: for, as the blacks know, he never goes hunting, as
men do, but always sits down in the shadow of his mountains.
Presently, he saw that the girl was escaping; she drew farther and
farther ahead, running like a dingo, and already he was puffing and
panting.  So he stamped his foot and called to his dogs, and they came
out of the holes of the hills--great savage brutes, lean and
hungry-looking, of a dark colour.  They came, running and growling, and
sniffing angrily at the air.  Their master waved his hand, and they
uttered a long howl and followed swiftly after Miraga.

Now, indeed, she thought that her end had come.  Mists swam before her
eyes, and her feet stumbled: she, whose limbs were so lithe and strong,
tottered like a weary old woman.  Behind her, the long howls of the
dogs woke terror in her heart.  They drew nearer; almost she could feel
their hot panting breath.  But just as she was about to sink down,
exhausted, the Little People in the dilly-bag chattered and called to
her.  "Mistress!  Oh, Mistress!" they cried.  "Let us out, that we may
save you!"

She heard them, and fumbled with shaking fingers at the fastening of
the bag.  It slipped from her shoulders, and fell to the ground; and as
it fell, the animals burst out and fled in many directions, some here
and some there, squeaking and chattering.  And when the fierce Dogs of
the Moon saw them, they forgot to pursue Miraga, but turned and coursed
swiftly after the animals.

Behind them the Man-Who-Dwells-In-The-Moon shouted vainly to them.
There are no animals in the Moon-Country, and so the Dogs have no
chance of hunting; but the sight of the scampering Little People woke
their instincts, and they dashed after them wildly.  They caught some,
and swiftly slew them; others dodged, and leaped, and twisted, escaping
into little rockholes, where the dogs could not follow them.  The noise
of the hunting and the deep baying of the Dogs echoed round the Moon
and made thunder boom among the Stars.

But Miraga ran on, stumbling for weariness.  She knew that the Dogs
were no longer close upon her, but she dreaded to hear them again at
any moment, for she did not see how such feeble Little People could
keep them off for long.  So she ran, and as she went, her tears fell
for the little friends who had given their lives for her.  At last, too
tired to see where her stumbling feet had led her, she came to the
brink of a great precipice, and fell down and down, until her senses
left her.

But when she opened her eyes again, it was to meet those of Konawarr;
and he was holding her in his arms and calling her name over and over,
with his voice full of pity and love; and behind him were his
friends--all the band who had been seeking her with him.  They were all
smiling to her, with welcome and joy on each friendly face.  For in her
fall she had come back to the dear Earth-World once more, and her
sorrows were at an end.

So, when the tribes look up to the sky on moonlit nights and see the
great shape that looms across the brightness, they say it is the mighty
Man-Who-Dwells-In-The-Moon; who, like themselves, is black, but grown
heavy and slothful with much idleness and sitting-down.  The parents
scare idle children with his name, saying that if they do not bestir
themselves they, too, will become fat and useless like him.  But Miraga
used to tell her children another story, and when she told it her eyes
would brim with tears.  It was the story of the Little People she
loved, who followed her to the Moon-Country, and there gave up their
lives for her, saving her first from Yurong, and then from the teeth of
the Dogs of the Moon.  And the children would shiver a little,
clustering more closely--all save little Konawarr, who would grasp his
tiny boomerang and declare that he would kill anything that dared to
hurt his mother.

The great dogs still crouch around the Man-Who-Dwells-In-The-Moon,
waiting to do his bidding.  You can see them, if you look closely--dark
spots, near the huge figure in the midst of the brightness.  They are
the fierce Dogs that guard the lonely country in the sky: the Dogs that
long ago hunted, howling, after Miraga the Beautiful, across the
shining spaces of the Moon.




IX

MIRRAN AND WARREEN

Mirran, the Kangaroo, and Warreen, the Wombat, were once men.  They did
not belong to any tribe, but they lived together, and were quite happy.
Nobody wanted them, and they did not want anybody.  So _that_ was quite
satisfactory.

Warreen was the first.  All his tribe had been drowned in a flood,
leaving him quite alone.  So he found a good camping-place, where there
were both shelter and water, and he made himself a camp of bark, which
he called, in the language of his tribe, a willum.  He was not in a
hurry when he was making it, so he did it well, and no rain could
possibly come through it.  One side of it was a big rock, which made it
very strong, so that no wind was likely to blow it away.  Overhead a
beautiful clump of yellow rock-lilies drooped gracefully.  Not that
Warreen cared for lilies; and this particular clump annoyed him, for
the rock was too steep for him to climb up and eat the lily-roots.

He had been living there for some time, very lazy and contented, when
one day Mirran appeared.  At first Warreen thought he meant to fight,
and that also annoyed him, because he hated fighting.  But Mirran soon
showed him that he only wanted to be friends; and then Warreen
discovered that he was very glad to have some one with whom he could
talk.  So after the manner of men, they sat down and yarned all day.

Several times during the day Mirran said, "I must be going."  But
Warreen always answered, "Oh, don't go yet"; and they went on talking
harder than ever.  Night came, and Mirran said, "It is really time I
made a move."  Warreen said, "Why not stay the night?  I can put you
up."  They talked it over for a while, and then it was quite too late
for Mirran to go.  So he stayed all night, and in the morning Warreen
said, "Why not spare me a few days, now that you are here?"  Mirran
willingly agreed to this, for he had nothing to do, and he thought it
very nice of Warreen to put the invitation that way.

They became great friends.  Mirran was tall and thin and sinewy, while
Warreen was very short and dumpy, and exceedingly fat.  Also, he was
lazy, and he liked having some one to help him get food, at which
Mirran was very quick and clever.

Mirran also was the last of his tribe.  The others had been killed by
warlike blacks, and Mirran would have been killed also, but that he
managed to swim across a river and get away into the scrub.  He was
very active and fleet of foot, and delighted in running, which was an
exercise that bored Warreen very badly.  Soon they made an arrangement
by which Mirran did all the hunting, while Warreen dug for yams and
other roots, and prepared the food, just as a woman does.  It suited
them both very well.

Mirran had one peculiarity that Warreen at first thought exceedingly
foolish.  He did not like to sleep indoors.  It was summer time when he
came, and he would not build himself a willum, but slept upon a soft
bed of grass under the stars.  If a cold night came, or even a rainy
one, he rolled himself in his 'possum rug and slept just as happily.
Warreen began by thinking he was mad.  But as time went on he often
slept outside with Mirran, himself, especially on those nights when
they were talking very hard and did not want to leave off.  Warreen
used to grumble at the hardness of the ground, but he was really very
much better for staying outside, in the fresh night-air.  His little
willum was a very stuffy place.

Sometimes he would think about the Winter, and say to Mirran:

"When are you going to build your willum?"

"Oh, there is plenty of time," Mirran would say.

"The cold weather will be here, and then what will you do?"

"Oh, I expect I shall have my camp ready in time.  It will not take me
long to build it, when the time comes."

"If you are not very careful, you will find yourself caught by the
Winter, and you will not like that," said Warreen.  But Mirran only
laughed and talked about something else.  He hated building, and was
anxious to put it off as long as possible.

Warreen had a very suspicious mind, and it often made him believe very
stupid things.  He was the kind of man who was best living alone,
because so often he got foolish ideas into his head about other people,
and imagined he had cause for offence when there was really none at
all.  So he began to wonder why Mirran would not build a camp, and the
thought came to him that perhaps he did not intend to build at all, but
meant to take possession of his own willum.  Of course, that was
ridiculous, for Mirran was only lazy, and kept saying to himself,
"To-morrow I will build"; and when to-morrow came, he would say, "Oh,
it is beautiful weather; I need not worry about building for a few days
yet."  So he went on putting it off, and Warreen went on being
suspicious, until sometimes he felt sorry he had ever asked Mirran to
live with him.  But Mirran sang and joked, and hunted, and had no idea
that Warreen was making himself uneasy by such stupid thoughts.

One night, clouds came drifting over the sky, after a hot day, and
Warreen said, "I am not going to sleep outside to-night."

"I don't think it will rain," said Mirran.  "It is much cooler out
here."

"Yes, but one soon forgets that when one is asleep.  I hate getting
wet," said Warreen.

"Well, just as you like," Mirran answered.  "For my part, I am too fond
of the stars to leave them."  So he spread his 'possum rug in a soft
place, and lay down.  In a few minutes he was fast asleep, and Warreen
went off to bed feeling rather bad-tempered, though he could not have
told why.

In the night, heavy rain came, and the air grew rapidly very cold.
Mirran woke up, grumbled a little at the weather, rolled himself in his
'possum rug and crept into the most sheltered corner he could find by
the rock, not liking to disturb Warreen by going into the willum.  It
was too cold to sleep, so he soon uncovered the ashes of their camp
fire, and put sticks on it; and there he crouched, shivering, and
wishing Warreen would wake up and invite him to sleep in the shelter.

But the rain came more and more heavily and a keen wind arose; and a
sudden squall put out Mirran's fire.  Soon, little channels of water
were finding their way in every direction over the hard ground, so that
Mirran became very wet and half-frozen.  Then he noticed a red glow
inside the willum.

"That is good," he said, joyfully, "Warreen is awake, and has made
himself a fire.  Now he will ask me to go and lie down in his hut."

He crouched close by the rock for a long time, thinking each moment
that Warreen would ask him in.  But no sound came, and after a while he
came to the conclusion that Warreen could not know he was awake.  So he
got up and went over to the door of the willum and looked in.  The
little fire was burning redly, and all looked very cosy and inviting to
poor, frozen Mirran.  Warreen lay near the fire, and looked at him
suspiciously.

"Ky! what a night!" said Mirran, his teeth chattering.  "You were right
about the weather, Warreen, and I was wrong.  I have been very sorry
for the last hour that my camp is not built.  May I come in and sit in
that corner?"

There was not much vacant space in Warreen's little willum, but it was
quite big enough for two at a pinch.  In the corner to which Mirran
pointed there was nothing.  But Warreen looked at him suspiciously, and
grunted under his breath.

"I want that corner for my head," he said, at last.  And he turned over
and laid his head there.

Mirran looked rather surprised.

"Never mind; this place will do," he said, pointing to another corner.

"I want that place for my feet," Warreen said.  And he moved over and
laid his feet there.

Still Mirran could not understand that his friend meant to be so
churlish.

"Well, this place will suit me famously," he said, pointing to where
Warreen's feet had been.

But that did not please Warreen either.

"You can't have that place--I may want it later on," he said, with a
snarl.  And he turned and lay down between the fire and Mirran, and
shut his eyes.

Then Mirran realized that Warreen did not mean him to have any warmth
or shelter, and he lost his temper.  He rushed outside into the wet
darkness, and stumbled over a big stone.  That was not a lucky stumble
for Warreen, for all that Mirran wanted at the moment was a weapon.

He picked up the stone and ran back into the willum.  Warreen lay by
the fire and he flung the stone at him as hard as he could.  It hit
Warreen on the forehead, and immediately his forehead went quite flat.

"That's something for you to remember me by!" said Mirran angrily.
"You can keep your dark little hole of a willum and live in it always,
just as you can keep your flat forehead.  I have done with you!"

He turned and ran out of the hut, for he was afraid that if he stayed
he would kill Warreen.  Behind him, Warreen staggered to his feet and
caught hold of his spear, which leaned against the wall near the
doorway.  He did not make any reply, but he drove the spear into the
darkness after Mirran, and it hit him in the back and hung there.
Mirran fell down without a word.  The light from the fire shone on him
as he lay there in the rain, with the spear behind him.

Warreen laughed a little, holding by his door-post.

"I shall have a flat forehead, shall I?" he said.  "Well, you will have
more than that.  Where that spear sticks, there shall it stick always,
and it will be a tail for you.  You will never run or jump without it
again--and never shall you have a willum."  Then he had no more
strength left, so he crept back and lay beside his fire, while Mirran
lay in the pouring rain.

No one saw Warreen and Mirran again as men.  But from that time two new
animals came into the Bush, and the Magpie and the Minah, those two
inquisitive birds who know everything, soon found out their story and
told it to all the black people.  So everybody knows that Warreen, the
Wombat, and Mirran, the Kangaroo, were once men and lived together.
They do not live together now, nor do they like each other.  The Wombat
is fat and surly and lazy, and he lives in a dark, ill-smelling hole in
the ground.  His forehead is flat, and he does not go far from his
hole; and he is no more fond of working for his living than he was when
he lived in a willum as a man.  The Kangaroo lives in the free open
places, and races through the Bush as swiftly as Mirran used to race
long ago.  But always behind him he carries Moo-ee-boo, as the blacks
call his tail, and it has grown so that he has to use it in running and
jumping, and now he could not get on without it.  He is just as quick
and gentle as ever, but when he is angry he can fight with his
forepaws, just as a man fights with his hands.

Other animals of the Bush have holes and hiding-places, but the
Kangaroo has none.  He does not look for shelter, but sleeps in the
open air.  It is difficult to see him, for when he is eating young
leaves and grass his skin looks just the same colour as the trees, and
you are sometimes quite close to him before his bright eyes are seen
watching you eagerly.  Then he turns and hops away, faster than a horse
can gallop, in great bounds that carry him yards at every stride, with
Moo-ee-boo, his long tail, thumping the ground behind him.  He has
learned to use it--to balance on it and make it help him in those
immense leaps that no animal in the Bush can equal.  So Warreen did not
do him so bad a turn as he hoped when he threw his spear at him that
rainy night long ago.




X

THE DAUGHTERS OF WONKAWALA

The Chief Wonkawala was a powerful man, who ruled over a big tribe.
They were a fierce and warlike people, always ready to go out against
other tribes; and by fighting they had gained a great quantity of
property, and roamed unmolested through a wide tract of country--which
meant that all the tribe was well-fed.

Wonkawala had not always been a chief.  He had been an ordinary
warrior, but he was fiercer and stronger than most men, and he had
gradually worked his way up to power and leadership.  There were many
jealous of him, who would have been glad to see his downfall; but
Wonkawala was wary, as well as brave, and once he had gained his
position, he kept it, and made himself stronger and stronger.  He had
several wives, and in his wurleys were fine furs and splendid weapons
and abundance of grass mats.  Every one feared him, and he had all that
the heart of a black chief could desire, except for one thing.  He had
no son.

Five daughters had Wonkawala, tall and beautiful girls, skilled in all
women's work, and full of high courage, as befits the daughters of a
chief.  Yillin was the eldest, and she was also the bravest and wisest,
so that her sisters all looked up to her and obeyed her.  Many young
warriors had wished to marry her, but she had refused them all.  "Time
enough," she said to her father.  "At present it is enough for me to be
the daughter of Wonkawala."

Her father was rather inclined to agree with her.  He knew that her
position as the eldest daughter of the chief--without brothers--was a
fine thing, and that once she married she would live in a wurley much
like any other woman's and do much the same hard work, and have much
the same hard time.  The life of the black women was not a very
pleasant one--it was no wonder that they so soon became withered and
bent and hideous.  Hard work, the care of many babies, little food, and
many blows: these were the portion of most women, and might well be
that even of the daughter of a chief, when once she left her father's
wurley for that of a young warrior.  So Wonkawala, who was unlike many
blacks in being very fond of his daughters, did not urge that Yillin
should get married, and the suitors had to go disconsolately away.

But there came a time when Wonkawala fell ill, and for many weeks he
lay in his wurley, shivering under his fur rugs, and becoming weaker
and weaker.  The medicine-men tried all kinds of treatment for him, but
nothing seemed to do him any good.  They painted him in strange
designs, and cut him with shell knives to make him bleed: and when he
complained of pain in the back they turned him on his face and stood on
his back.  So Wonkawala complained no more; but the back was no better.

After the sorcerers had tried these and many other methods of healing,
they declared that some one had bewitched Wonkawala.  This was a
favourite device of puzzled sorcerers.  They had made the tribes
believe that if a man's enemy got possession of anything that had
belonged to him--even such things as the bones of an animal he had
eaten, broken weapons, scraps of furs he had worn, or, in fact,
anything he had touched--it could be employed as a charm against him,
especially to produce illness.  This made the blacks careful to burn up
all rubbish before leaving a camping-place; and they were very keen in
finding odd scraps of property that had belonged to an unfriendly
tribe.  Anything of this kind that they found was given to the chief,
to be carefully kept as a means of injuring the enemy.  A fragment of
this description was called a wuulon, and was thought to have great
power as a charm for evil.  Should one of the tribe wish to be revenged
upon an enemy, he borrowed his wuulon from the chief, rubbed it with a
mixture of red clay and emu fat, and tied it to the end of a
spear-thrower, which he stuck upright in the ground before the
camp-fire.  Then all the blacks sat round, watching it, but at some
distance away, so that their shadows should not fall upon it, and
solemnly chanted imprecations until the spear-thrower fell to the
ground.  They believed that it would fall in the direction of the enemy
to whom the wuulon belonged, and immediately they all threw hot ashes
in the same direction, with hissing and curses, and prayers that
ill-fortune and disease might fall upon the owner.

The sorcerers tried this practice with every wuulon in Wonkawala's
possession; but whatever effect might have been produced on the owners
of the wuulons, Wonkawala himself was not helped at all.  He grew
weaker and weaker, and it became plain that he must die.

The knowledge that they were to lose their chief threw all the blacks
into mourning and weeping, so that the noise of their cries was heard
in the wurley where Wonkawala lay.  But besides those who mourned,
there were others who plotted, even though they seemed to be crying as
loudly as the rest.  For, since Wonkawala had no son, some other man
must be chosen to succeed him as chief, and there were at least half a
dozen who thought they had every right to the position.  So they all
gathered their followings together, collecting as many supporters as
each could muster, and there seemed every chance of a very pretty fight
as soon as Wonkawala should breathe his last.

The dying chief was well aware of what was going on.  He knew that they
must fight it out between themselves, and that the strongest would win;
but what he was most concerned about was the safety of his daughters.
Their fate would probably be anything but pleasant.  Once left without
him, they would be no longer the leading girls of the tribe, and much
petty spite and jealousy would probably be visited upon them by the
other women.  Or they might be made tools in the fight for the
succession to his position, and mixed up in the feuds and disputes
which would ensue: indeed, it might easily happen that they would be
killed before the fighting settled down.  In any case it seemed to
Wonkawala that hardship and danger were ahead of them.

He called them to him one evening, and made them kneel down, so close
that they could hear him when he spoke in a whisper.

"Listen," he said.  "I am dying.  No, do not begin wailing now--there
will be time enough for that afterwards.  My day is done, and it has
been a good day: I have been a strong man and my name will be
remembered as a chief.  What can a man want more?  But you are women,
and my heart is uneasy about you."

"Nothing will matter to us, if you die!" said Yillin.

"You may think so now," said the chief, looking at her with affection
in his fierce eyes.  "But my death may well be the least of the bad
things that may happen to you.  You will be as slaves where you have
been as princesses.  Even if I am in the sky with Pund-jel, Maker of
Men, I shall be unhappy to see that.  Therefore, it seems to me that
you must leave the tribe."

"Leave the tribe!" breathed Yillin, who always spoke for her sisters.
"But where should we go?"

"I have dreamed that you shall go to the east," said her father.  "What
is to happen to you I do not know, but you must go.  You may fall into
the power of another tribe, but I believe they would be kinder to you
than your own would be, for there will be much fighting here after I
have gone to Pund-jel.  I think any other tribe would take you in with
the honour that is due to a chief's daughters.  In any case, it is
better to be slaves among strangers than in the place where you have
been rulers."

"I would rather die than be a slave here!" said Yillin proudly.

"Spoken like a son!" said the old chief, nodding approval.  "Get
weapons and food ready secretly, all that you can carry: and when the
men are away burying me, make your escape.  They will be so busy in
quarrelling that they will not notice soon that you have gone; and then
they will be afraid to go after you, lest any should get the upper hand
during their absence.  Go to the east, and Pund-jel will decide your
fate.  Now I am weary, and I wish to sleep."

So Yillin and her sisters obeyed, and during the next few days they hid
weapons in a secret place outside the camp, and crammed their
dilly-bags with food, fire-sticks, charms, and all the things they
could carry.  Already they could see that there was wisdom in their
father's advice.  There was much talk that ceased suddenly when they
came near, and the women used to whisper together, looking at them, and
bursting into rude laughter.  Yillin and her sisters held their heads
high, but there was fierce anger in their hearts, for but a week back
no one would have dared to show them any disrespect.

At last, one evening, Wonkawala died, and the whole tribe mourned for
him.  For days there was weeping and wailing, and all the time the
chief's daughters remained within their wurley, seeing no one but the
women who brought them food.  As the time went on, the manner of these
women became more and more curt, and the food they brought less
excellent, until, on the last day of mourning, Yillin and her sisters
were given worse meals than they had ever eaten before.

"Our father spoke truth," said Yillin.  "It is time we fled."

"Time, indeed," said Peeka, the youngest sister.  "Did you see
Tar-nar's sneering face as she threw this evil food in to us?"

"I would that Wonkawala, our father, could have come to life again to
see it," said Yillin with an angry sob.  "He would have withered her
with his fury.  But our day, like his, is done--in our own tribe.
Never mind--we shall find luck elsewhere."

After noon of that day the men of the tribe bore the body of Wonkawala
away, to bury it with honour.  The women stayed behind, wailing loudly
as long as the men were in sight; but as soon as the trees hid them
from view they ceased to cry out, and began to laugh and eat and enjoy
themselves.  They fell silent, presently, as the five daughters of
Wonkawala came out of their wurley and walked slowly across the camp.
They were muffled in their 'possum-rugs, scarcely showing their faces.

For a moment there was silence, and then one of the women said
something to another at which both burst into a cackle of laughter.
Then another called to the five sisters, in a familiar and insolent
manner.

"Where do you go, girls?"

"We go to mourn for our father in a quiet place," answered Yillin
haughtily.

"Oh--then the camp is not good enough for you to mourn in?" cried the
woman with a sneer "But do not be away too long--there will be plenty
of work to do, for you, now.  Remember, you are no longer our
mistresses."

"No--it is your turn to serve us, now," cried another.  "Bring me back
some yams when you come--then perhaps there will not be so many
beatings for you!"  There was a yell of laughter from all the women,
amidst which Yillin and her sisters marched out of the camp, with
disdainful glances.

When they drew near their hiding-place they kept careful watch, in case
anyone had followed them.  As a matter of fact, all the women were by
that time busily engaged in ransacking their wurley, and dividing among
them the possessions the sisters had not been able to carry away; so
that they were quite safe.  They collected their weapons and hurried
off into the forest.

They had obeyed their father and gone east, and the burial-place was
west of the camp, so they met nobody, and their flight was not
discovered that night.  The men came back to the camp in the evening,
hungry and full of eagerness about the fight for the leadership of the
tribe, and the women were kept busy in looking after them.  The first
fight took place that very evening, and though it was not a very big
one, it left no time for anyone to wonder what had become of the five
sisters.  Not until next day did the tribe realize that they had run
away; and then, as Wonkawala had foreseen, no one wanted to run after
them.  Certain young warriors who had thought of marrying them were
annoyed, but they could only promise themselves to pursue and capture
them when the tribe should again have settled down under new leadership.

The five sisters were very sad when they started on their journey, for
the Bush is a wide and lonely place for women, and there seemed nothing
ahead of them but difficulty and danger.  They wept as they hurried
through the forest, nor did they dare to sleep for a long time.  Only
when they were so weary that they could scarcely drag themselves along,
did they fling themselves down in a grassy hollow, where tall ferns
made a screen from any prying eyes, and a stream of water gave them
refreshment.  They slept soundly, and dreamed gentle dreams; and when
they awoke in the morning it seemed that a great weight had been lifted
from their hearts.

"I feel so happy, sisters," said Yillin, sitting up and rubbing her
eyes.  "Our father came to me in my sleep, and told me to be of good
courage and to smile instead of weeping."

"He came to me, also," said Peeka, "and told me there was good luck
ahead."

"After all," said another of the girls, "what have we to fret about?
It is a fine thing to go out and see the world.  I am certain that we
are going to enjoy ourselves."

"It will be interesting, at any rate," said Yillin.  "But we must hurry
onward, for we are not yet safe from pursuit--though I do not think it
will come."

They made as much haste as possible for the next few days, until it
seemed certain that no one was tracking them down; and with each dawn
they felt happier and more free from care.  They were lucky in finding
game, so that they were well-fed; and on the fifth day they came upon
trees loaded with mulga apples, which gave them a great feast.  They
roasted many of the apples and carried them with them in their
food-bowls.  Sometimes they came to little creeks, fringed with
maidenhair fern, where they bathed; sometimes they passed over great,
rolling plains, where they could see for miles, and where kangaroos
were feeding in little mobs, dotted here and there on the
kangaroo-grass they loved.  Flocks of white cockatoos, sulphur-crested,
flew screaming overhead, and sometimes they saw the beautiful pink and
grey galahs, wheeling aloft, the sunlight gleaming on their grey backs
and rose-pink crests.  Then they went across a little range of
thickly-wooded hills, where the trees were covered with flocks of
many-coloured parrots, and the purple-crowned lorikeets flew,
screeching--sometimes alighting, like a flock of great butterflies, on
a gum-tree, to hang head downwards among the leaves, licking the sweet
eucalyptus honey from the flowers with their brush-like tongues.

Sometimes, when they had lain very quietly through a hot noon-tide
hour, they saw the lyre bird, the shyest bird of all the Bush, dancing
on the great mound--twenty or thirty feet high--which it builds for its
dome-shaped nest; mocking, as it danced, the cries of half the birds in
the country, and waving its beautiful lyre-shaped tail.  The magpie
woke them in the dawn with its rich gurgling notes; the beautiful
blue-wren hopped near them, proud of his exquisite plumage of black and
bright blue, chirping his happy little song.  They passed swamps, where
cranes and herons fished, stalking in the shallows, or flew lazily away
with dangling legs; and sometimes they heard the booming of the
bittern, which made them very much afraid.  At evening they would hear
a harsh, clanging cry, and, looking up, they would see a long line of
black swans, flying into the sunset.  There were other birds too, more
than any white boy or girl will ever know about: for these were the old
days of Australia, long before the white men had come to settle the
country and destroy the Bush with their axes.  But there were no
rabbits, and no thistles, for Australia was free from them until the
white men came.

Gradually the daughters of Wonkawala lost all fear.  They were
perfectly happy, and the Bush no longer seemed lonely to them; they had
enough to eat, they were warm at night, and so strong and active, and
so skilled in the use of weapons, had their woodland life made them,
that they did not seem to mind whether they met enemies or not.  They
often danced as they went on their way, and made all the echoes of the
forest ring with their songs.

At last, one day, they found their way barred by a wide river which
flowed from north to south.  They could, of course, all swim; but it
was not easy to see how to get their furs across.  They were talking
about it, wondering whether they could make a canoe or a raft, when
they heard a friendly hail, and, looking across, they saw five girls
standing on the opposite bank.

"Who are you?" shouted the strangers.

"We are the daughters of Wonkawala," they cried.  "Who are you?"

"We are girls of the Wapiya tribe, out looking for adventures."

"Why, so are we, and we have found many."  They shouted questions and
answers backwards and forwards, until they began to feel acquainted.
"What do you eat?"  "What furs have you?"  "What songs do you sing?"
That led to singing, and they sang all their favourite songs to each
other, beating two boomerangs together as an accompaniment.  When they
had finished they felt a great desire to travel together.

"It is really a great pity that the river flows between us," cried the
daughters of Wonkawala.  "How can we join you?"

The Wapiya girls laughed.

"That is quite easy," they answered.  "This is a magic river, and when
once your feet have touched it you will be Magic too.  Dance straight
across!"

"You are making fun of us," cried Yillin.

"No, indeed, we are not.  We cannot cross to you, for on your side
there is no Magic.  But if you will trust us, and dance across, you
will find that you will not sink."

This was hard to believe, and the sisters looked at each other
doubtfully.  Then Yillin took off her rug and handed it to Peeka.

"It will be easy enough to try, and at the worst I can only get a
wetting," she said.  "Follow me if I do not sink."

She went down to the water and danced out upon its surface.  It did not
yield beneath her; the surface seemed to swing and heave as though it
were elastic, but it supported her and she danced across with long,
sliding steps.  Behind her came her sisters; and so delightful was it
to dance on the swinging river-top that they burst into singing, and so
came, with music and laughter, to the other side.  The Wapiya girls met
them with open arms.

"Ky!  You are brave enough to join us!" they cried.  "Now we can all go
in quest of adventure together, and who knows what wonderful things may
befall us!"

So they told each other all their histories, and they held a feast; and
after they had all eaten, they danced off to the east together, for
they were all so happy that their feet refused to walk sedately.
Presently they came to an open space where were many tiny hillocks.

"This is Paridi-Kadi, the place of ants," said the Wapiya girls.  "Here
we have often come before, to gather ants' eggs."

"Dearly do we love ants' eggs," said little Peeka, licking her lips.

"And these are very good eggs," said the eldest of the Wapiya girls,
whose name was Nullor.  "But the ants defend them well, and those who
take them must make up their minds to be bitten."

"Ants' eggs are worth a few bites."

"Certainly they are.  Now let us see if you are really as brave as you
say."

They attacked the hillocks with their digging-sticks, and unearthed
great stores of plump eggs, which they eagerly gathered.  But they also
unearthed numbers of huge ants of a glossy dark green colour, and these
defended their eggs bravely, springing at the girls and biting them
whenever they could.

"Ky!" said Yillin, shaking one off her arm.  "It is as well that these
eggs are so very good, for the bites are certainly very bad.  We have
no ants like these in our country."

"Have you had enough?" asked Nullor, laughing.

"Enough bites, yes; but not enough eggs," said Yillin, laughing as
well.  "The eggs are worth the pain."  She thrust her digging-stick
into a hillock so energetically that she scattered earth and eggs and
ants in all directions, and one ant landed on Nullor's nose and bit it
severely--whereat Nullor uttered a startled yell of pain, and the
daughters of Wonkawala laughed very much.

"Who is brave now?" cried little Peeka.

Nullor rubbed her nose with a lump of wet earth, which, as she was
black, did not have such a curious effect as it would have had on you.

"I was taken by surprise," she said, somewhat shamefacedly.  "And
indeed, my nose is not used to such treatment, for I do not usually
poke it into ants' nests!"

They ate all the eggs, and rubbed their bites with chewed leaves, which
soon took away the stings; and then they danced away together.  After a
time, Yillin saw an eagle flying low, carrying something in its talons.
She flung a boomerang at it, and so well did she aim that she broke its
neck, and the great bird came fluttering down.  It fell into a pool of
water and Yillin jumped in to rescue its prey, for she could see that
it was alive.  It turned out to be a half-grown dingo, a fine young
dog, which was too bewildered, between flying and drowning, to make any
objection to being captured.  Yillin secured it with a string which she
plaited of her own hair and as much of Peeka's as Peeka was willing to
part with, and fed it with bits of wallaby; and the dog soon became
friendly and licked her hand.

"He is a lovely dog," she said, "and I will always keep him.  I will
call him Dulderana."

"I think he will be rather a nuisance," said Nullor.  "Anyway, he will
soon leave you and go back into the Bush."

"I do not think he will," Yillin said.

"Well, you cannot teach him to dance or sing," said Nullor, laughing,
"so he will have to run behind us."

"Of course he will; and he will be very useful in hunting," said
Yillin.  "We should not have lost that 'possum yesterday if we had had
a dog."

Dulderana very soon made himself at home, and became great friends with
all the girls.  It amused him very much when they danced, and though he
could not dance himself, he used to caper wildly round them, uttering
short, sharp barks of delight.  But their singing he did not like at
all, and when they began, he used to sit down with his nose pointing
skywards, and howl most dismally, until the girls could not sing for
laughing.  Then they would pelt bits of stick at him until he was
sorry.  By degrees he learned to endure the singing in silence, but he
never pretended to enjoy it.

One day, as they went along, they saw in the far distance a silvery
gleam.

"What is that?" asked Yillin.

"It looks like the duntyi, or silver bush," said the Wapiya girls,
doubtfully.

"That does not grow in our country," said Yillin.  "Let us go and look
at it."

But when they drew near, they saw that it was not a bush at all.
Instead, it was a man, a very old man.  He had no hair on his head, but
his great silver beard hung straggling to his knees, and when the
breeze blew it about it was so large that it was no wonder they had
mistaken it for a bush.  No word did he speak, but he sat and looked at
them in silence, and when they greeted him respectfully he only nodded.
Something about him made them feel afraid.  They clustered together,
looking at him.  At last he spoke.

"I have come too soon," he said.  "You are not ready for me yet.  Go
on."

At that Dulderana howled very dismally indeed, and rushed away with his
tail between his legs.  The girls quite understood how he felt, and
they also ran away, never stopping until they were far from the strange
old man.

"Now, who was that?" Yillin said.

Nullor looked uneasy.

"I do not know," she said.  "This is a strange country, and there is
much Magic in it.  We will hurry on, or he may perhaps come after us."

So they hastened on into the forest, forgetting, for a while, to dance;
but then their fear left them, and again their songs rang through the
Bush.  They passed a clump of black wattle, the trunks of which were
covered with gum, in great shining masses, so that they had a splendid
feast; for the gum was both food and drink, and what they could not eat
they mixed with water and drank, enjoying its sweet flavour.  With
their bags filled with gum they went on, and one evening they camped
among a grove of banksia trees, near a pool of quiet water.  It was not
very good water to drink, but the Wapiya girls showed the five sisters
how to suck it up through banksia cones, which strained out any
impurities and gave it a very pleasant taste.  They were tired, and lay
down early.

In the night a great wind sprang up, and with it came a curious booming
noise.  It woke the daughters of Wonkawala, and they sat up in alarm.

"Ky! that must be a huge bittern," said Peeka.

"It is not like a bittern," Yillin said.  "I have never heard any sound
like it.  Perhaps it is the Bunyip, of whom our mother used to tell us
when we were little--a terrible beast who lives in swamps, and whose
voice fills every one with terror."

The Wapiya girls woke up, and they also listened.  Then they laughed
among themselves, but they did not let the sisters see that they were
laughing.  They seemed to think little of the noise.

"It is only the wind howling," they said.  "Lie down and sleep, you
five inlanders!"

"What do you mean by that?" demanded Yillin.  But the Wapiya girls only
giggled again, and lay down, declaring that no Bunyip was going to
spoil their sleep.  And as they were so cheerful, the sisters came to
the conclusion that they might as well do the same.

When they awoke it was day, and the booming was still going on, and the
wind felt fresh and wet.  The Wapiya girls were already up, and they
greeted them with laughter.

"We have a surprise for you," said they.  "Shut your eyes, and let us
lead you."

The sisters did so, and felt themselves led forward.  Presently the
earth became soft and yielding under their feet, and they cried out in
alarm, but the others laughed again, and said, "Never mind, you are
quite safe."

In a moment more they said, "Now, open your eyes!"  The sisters did so,
and lo! they stood before a great sheet of water with high, tumbling
waves.  Blue and sparkling was the water, and the big waves came
rolling in, gathering themselves up slowly with their tops a mass of
foam, which slowly rose and curled over until it plunged down, crashing
in a smother of breaking bubbles.  The daughters of Wonkawala had never
seen anything like it before, and they gasped in amazement.

"Ky! what a river!" they cried.  "Where is the other side?"

The Wapiya girls shouted with laughter.

"The other side!" they gasped, when they could speak.  "Why, there is
no other side.  This is the Sea, and it is the end of all things.  Have
you never heard of it?"

"Is _that_ the Sea?"  The five sisters stared.  "We have heard stories
of it from the old men and women, but we never imagined that it was
like this.  No one could imagine it without seeing it.  Have you known
it before?"

"Oh, yes.  We have often camped here with our tribe.  Come nearer."

They took the sisters down to the edge of the water, and presently a
great wave rolled in, broke in a thunderous roar, and came dashing up
the sand.  The sisters stared at it in amazed admiration at first, and
then, as it came nearer, Fear fell upon them, and they screamed and
turned to fly.  They ran as fast as they could in the yielding sand,
but the wave came faster and the water caught them, at first round
their ankles and then swiftly mounting to their knees.  Then it went
back, and the sisters thought that they were slipping back with it, and
screamed louder than ever.  The Wapiya girls, themselves weak with
laughter, caught hold of them.

"The Sea!" screamed the sisters.  "The Sea is carrying us away!"

The others led them up on higher sand and laughed at them until they
began to laugh at themselves.

"Never before have I seen water that runs backwards and forwards, as
though a great giant were shaking it in a bowl," said Yillin.  "We are
sorry to have been afraid, but it is all very peculiar and unexpected.
Are you sure it is not Magic?"

"I do not think anyone can be sure of that about the Sea," said Nullor.
"It is strange water, and indeed I often think that it is very great
Magic indeed.  But if it is, it is a good Magic, and we are not afraid
of it."

"And this queer yellow earth, that slips away under the feet--is that
Magic too?"

"Oh--the sand.  Perhaps it is--who knows.  But it will not hurt you.
Come on, let us bathe in the Sea, for that is one of the most beautiful
things in the world."

The daughters of Wonkawala hung back at first, for they were very
doubtful of trusting themselves to the magic water.  But the others
laughed and persuaded them, and they ventured in, paddling at first,
until they became used to the rushing breakers.  But soon they gained
confidence, and before long not even the Wapiya were bolder than they,
and they would dive into a breaker and be carried in on its curling
top, laughing and playing like so many mermaids: so that the Wapiya
girls soon lost any feeling of superiority, and only regained it once,
when Peeka, feeling thirsty, scooped up some of a passing wave in her
cupped hands and took a deep draught.  For the next two minutes Peeka
was coughing and spluttering and spitting, while the other girls yelled
with laughter.

"That is certainly very bad Magic," said Peeka angrily, when she could
speak.  "What has made the water turn bad?"

That set the Wapiya girls off into fresh peals of mirth, and it was
some time before they could explain that the water was always salt.
Peeka was annoyed, but presently she laughed too.

"Oh, well, if that is the worst of its Magic, there is not much to
grumble at," she said.  "Come on, girls, let us dive into this next
one!"  And the next moment Peeka's merry black face was half hidden in
the flying spray as the breaker bore her ashore.

They stayed by the Sea for some days, for the inland girls were too
fascinated to leave it, and when they were not bathing in it, they were
wandering along the shore, wildly excited over finding shells and
seaweed and all the other treasures of the sands.  Then one day a great
black cloud came up, obscuring all the sky, and instead of being
sparkling blue and silver, the water turned to a dull grey and looked
dead and oily.  The other girls were afraid of it, and would not go
into the cold, dark breakers: but Yillin, who loved bathing more than
any of them, would not be persuaded, and plunged in for a swim.  She
did not stay long, for the water felt more and more uncomfortable each
moment; so she let a big, sullen breaker carry her in, and, wading out,
ran up the beach to the other girls.

They started back when they saw her, looking at her with amazement and
fear.

"What have you done to yourself?" cried Nullor.

"I?  Nothing.  What are you looking at?"

Nullor pointed a shaking forefinger at her body, and looking down,
Yillin uttered a bewildered cry.  No longer was she smooth-skinned and
black.  Her body and legs were thickly covered with shining scales, so
that she gleamed like silver.

[Illustration: "Her body and legs were thickly covered with shining
scales, so that she gleamed like silver."]

"It is the water!" she stammered.  "It must be!"

"Does it feel pleasant?" inquired Nullor.  "It looks quite beautiful."

"I do not feel anything at all," Yillin answered.  "But it certainly
does look well."  She gazed at her shining self with interest, and
turned round so that the others might see if her back were similarly
ornamented.  It was, and the other girls grew a little jealous.

"Jump in, and see if the Magic will come upon you, too," cried Yillin.

They did not lose a moment.  Flinging their fur aprons from them, they
rushed down the beach and plunged into the dark waves.  And lo! when
they emerged, they too were covered with silver scales.  They stood
together on the sand, a shining company.

"Let us walk along the shore, and see what else will befall us," said
Yillin.

They gathered up their property and set off eastwards again.  The shore
curved out after a time, forming a rocky cape.  They rounded this, and
found themselves on the coast of a little bay, round which they
hurried, anxious to explore some great rocks at the farther point.  But
when they reached them, they found their way barred.  The rocks were a
solid wall: a great black cliff that rose sheer from the water, running
far out beyond even the farthest line of the breakers.  Nowhere was
there any way of advancing: the bay was ringed with the dark, smooth
cliffs.  The little dog Dulderana whimpered as if in fear.

"Let us go back!" said the Wapiya girls.  "This is not a good place."

For a moment the daughters of Wonkawala were inclined to agree.  Then
there came to them suddenly the vision of their father, who had said,
"Go to the east," and they knew they must obey.

"We are not afraid," they said.  "Go you back, if you wish."

"We do not wish to leave you," the Wapiya said sadly.

"Nor do we wish to lose you, for we have loved you very much," said the
sisters.  "But we must go forward.  Will you not come?"

The Wapiya girls shook their heads.

"No," they said.  "Something tells us that we must return, and never
see you more.  But we will always watch for you, and perhaps some day
we may hear you coming, singing our old songs, and we will run to meet
you."

They embraced each other, weeping, and slowly the Wapiya girls went
back until the rocky promontory hid them from sight.  Then Yillin
dashed her tears away.

"Come, my sisters!" she cried.

They took hands and danced together towards the wall of rock that
loomed before them, black, unbroken, forbidding.  Yillin was at the
end, and as she reached the rock she raised her Wona, or digging-stick,
and struck the rock.  It split open, and they danced through the cleft.
Before them was no more the Sea, but a green country dotted with trees,
and covered with thick grass.  A little way from them was a low mound,
towards which they danced.  As they drew near, they saw that some one
was sitting on it--a very old man, whose silver beard swept below his
feet.  He sat motionless, save that his hands were always busy, pulling
the long silver hairs from his beard and twisting them into a cord.

"It is the old man we met long ago!" whispered the sisters.

Somehow, the fear that they had felt when they met him with the Wapiya
girls was upon them no longer: and the little dog Dulderana, who had
fled from him howling, now ran up to him gaily, frisking round him.
The old man put out his hand and fondled him, and Dulderana snuggled
against him; then, nestling down with his head on his fore-paws, he
looked at Yillin as if to say, "This is my master."

Yillin understood the look in his eyes.

"Do you like him, Master?" she asked.  "We bring him to you as a gift."

"That is a good gift," said the old man, looking much pleased.  "And
you are welcome, my children.  I think that this time I have not met
you too soon.  Are you weary with all your wanderings?"

"No, we are never weary," said Yillin.  "We have danced, and hunted,
and bathed, and sung; and we have forgotten all our sorrows.  Our
father, Wonkawala, bade us come east, and we obeyed him."

"And so you found friends and happiness," said the old man.  "Sit down,
and tell me of all that you have seen."

They sat down in a semi-circle before him, and, speaking one after
another, they told him the story of their long journey.  He heard them
in silence, nodding now and then: and all the time his fingers moved
ceaselessly, plaiting the silver hairs into a long cord.  It lay in
great shining coils at his feet.  The little dog nestled beside him,
and sometimes, when he paused to adjust a fresh coil, his fingers
rested for a moment on its head.

He smiled at the sisters when they had finished their story.

"It was indeed a great journey; and the Sea has clothed you in silver,
so that you are more glorious than any chief's daughters have ever been
before," he said.  "And now comes the greatest adventure of all."

He rose, as he spoke, pointing to the sky.  The sisters looked up, and
cried out in awe.  For as they looked, the clouds parted, and they saw
behind them Arawotya, who lives in the sky: a great and gentle Being
whose face seemed to have light behind it.  He looked down at them
kindly, and beckoned.  Then he began to lower a long cord, made, like
that of the old man, of plaited hair.  It reached almost to the top of
the mound where they stood.

"You are to go up," said the old man.  "You first, I last of all.  But
first we will send up the little dog, that you may see how safe it is."

He took his silver cord and tied it round the body of Dulderana, then
joining it to the magic cord from the sky.  Then Arawotya pulled it up,
so gently that the little dog never seemed frightened, and he
disappeared behind a cloud.  Presently the cord came back again, and
one after another the old man tied the girls with it, and Arawotya drew
them up to himself.  Yillin was the last of the sisters to go, but as
she was being pulled up she cut her hand with her digging-stick, and
her Pirha, or food-bowl, fell.  It was a very beautiful carved Pirha,
and, because it had been her father's, Yillin felt very sad.  Even when
Arawotya had gently received her, and, untying the cord, placed her by
her sisters, she peered over the edge of the cloud, trying to see where
it had fallen.

The old man was being drawn up, and just as he reached the clouds
Yillin caught sight of her Pirha, lying on the mound.

"See!" she whispered to Peeka.  "My Pirha--it lies below.  I will just
slide down the cord and get it, for it belonged to our father,
Wonkawala.  Arawotya will forgive me and pull me up again."

She slid hurriedly down the cord and joyfully seized the bowl.  But
when she turned to climb up again she uttered a cry of despair, for the
cord was out of her reach.  Arawotya had drawn it up.  As she looked,
it disappeared, and then the cloud-masses swept together, blotting out
everything above.  She was alone.

All that day and night Yillin lay on the mound, weeping, and begging
Arawotya to forgive her and take her up to her sisters.  But all the
clouds had gone, and there was only a clear blue sky, bright with
moonlight and dotted with a million stars: and there was no sign of
those whom she had lost.  She gave herself up to despair.

"Yakai!" she moaned.  "Better that I had remained a slave in the camp
of Wonkawala than have come to this lonely land to die!"

Towards morning, exhausted, she fell into a troubled sleep.  And in her
sleep her father came to her, and his face was grave and kind.

"Alas, my daughter!" he said.  "You have lost your chance of happiness
for the sake of a worthless Pirha.  What! did you imagine that you
would need a Pirha in the sky?"

"No--but because it was yours, my father," she sobbed in her sleep.

Wonkawala's face shone with a great light.

"Always you were my dear and faithful daughter," he said.  "Because of
that, there is yet happiness for you.  Go forward, and no matter what
shall befall you, be of good courage."

Then the vision faded, and after that Yillin's sleep was no longer
troubled.  She woke refreshed in the morning, and although she was
lonely for her sisters, there was hope in her heart.  She took her
weapons and went forward.

It was a quiet country.  There seemed no men and women in it, nor even
any animals; and even the birds were strange to her.  She passed over a
great rocky plain, making for a green line of trees that seemed to mark
the windings of a creek, for she was very thirsty.  She found it, a
clear wide stream, and drank deeply: then she wandered along its banks.
And here at length there was a touch of home, for there were many
crimson parrots in the trees, and the noise of their harsh crying to
each other was as music in her ears.  They had their mates, and to see
them made her feel less lonely.

She found some roots and berries, which she ate, hoping they were good
for food: and when night came, she curled into a hollow under a rock
and slept deeply, waking refreshed, eager to go on her way.  Then for
many days she wandered, following the course of the creek, for she was
afraid to go far from water.  She was a strange figure in her silvery
scales.  Whenever she caught sight of herself, mirrored in the water as
she bent to drink, it gave her a new throb of amazement.

She was wandering along one day when a rustling in the bushes made her
glance aside.  To her surprise, a dog was looking at her, and she could
see that it was a tame one.  Yillin had always loved dogs, and she
whistled to this one, trying to coax it to play with her.  But the dog
was suspicious, and backed away from her, growling: then it uttered a
few short barks and raced off into the scrub.

Two black hunters, who were ranging through the Bush a little way off,
stopped, hearing the barking.

"My dog has started game of some kind," said one.  "He does not bark
for nothing."

"Let us go and look," said the other.  They turned aside in the
direction of the sound, and presently came upon the dog, who bounded to
his master and licked his hand.

"What have you been barking for?" demanded his master, patting him.
The dog wagged his tail vigorously and ran a few paces into the bushes.

"I believe there is something in that direction," the hunter said.  "We
might as well go and see, Chukeroo."

They moved noiselessly through the scrub, and presently Chukeroo caught
his friend's arm.

"See, Wonga," he whispered.  "There is a demon!  Let us fly!"

Wonga looked, and saw a strange, glittering figure standing by a tree.
He was just as afraid as his friend, but he was also full of curiosity.

"It seems to be a woman-demon," he whispered back.  "See! it has long
hair, and the face is the face of a woman."  He pondered, watching the
strange apparition.  "And it carries weapons--strange, that a demon
should go armed, Chukeroo.  I should like to get hold of those weapons.
They would be worth having in a fight."

"You may try, if you like, but I have no fancy for fighting demons,"
said Chukeroo.

"I do not know that I have, either," said Wonga.  "Perhaps, though, a
woman-demon would not be so terrible to fight.  Look how she glitters
when she moves!  She would be a startling wife for a man to take home
to his wurley, Chukeroo."

"Every one to his fancy," returned his friend.  "Personally I prefer
mine black."

"You are used to yours, but I have none yet," said Wonga, laughing, for
he was a cheerful youth.  "Come, I am going to get a nearer look at the
demon.  Are you afraid?"

"Very much, but I suppose I had better come," said Chukeroo
grumblingly.  "You are a mad-headed fellow, Wonga, and you will get
into trouble if you do not take care.  I only hope that this is not the
sort of demon that the sorcerers tell us about, who can blast men to
cinders with a wave of the hand."

He followed his friend, and they crept through the bushes until they
found a place where they could see the strange being more closely.  In
their excitement they had forgotten the dog, and suddenly it gave a
loud bark.  The shining figure turned sharply and ran towards them.

"Save yourself!" uttered Chukeroo.  "It has seen us!"

They turned to run, but in crossing a clear space Chukeroo caught his
foot in a trail of clematis and fell headlong, scattering his weapons.
Wonga pulled himself up, and raced back to help his friend.  Before
they could gather all the fallen spears the strange being was upon them.

Yillin was as astonished as the black hunters--and as afraid.  But she
had learned to defend herself, and so she flung her digging-stick at
Wonga.  It grazed his leg, and made him so angry that he forgot all
about being afraid of this demon, and hurled his spears at her.  But
his fear returned when he saw them glance off her shining scales as
though she were covered with glass, and then fall harmlessly to the
ground.  Chukeroo joined in the fight: but though the aim of both
hunters was true, nothing seemed to pierce those magic scales.
Moreover, the strange being, having lost her digging-stick, picked up
the fallen spears and flung them at their owners so rapidly that they
thought themselves lucky in being able to dodge behind trees with whole
skins.

"She is indeed a demon!" gasped Chukeroo.

"She may be, but she is very like a woman," said Wonga.  "And I am not
going home to tell the other warriors that a woman has stolen my
spears, even if she does happen to be a demon.  Besides, you know as
well as I do that they will not believe us.  Even your own wife will
laugh at you, and she will not believe."

"That is true enough," said Chukeroo gloomily.  "What are we to do?"

"I will make you armour," said Wonga.  "Then we will go back, and when
the demon throws the spears at you they will stick in the armour, and I
will rush in and secure them."

"I do not know that it is much of a plan, but at least I have no
better," said Chukeroo.  "Be quick, or the demon may come and find us
unarmed."

So Wonga broke off young saplings, and lashed them round his friend
with strips of twisted stringy bark fibre, until nothing of him could
be seen, and he had great difficulty in moving.  Then, slowly and
cautiously, they made their way back to the open space where they had
fought.

Yillin was standing wearily by a tree with the spears in her hand.  She
jumped round as they came, and while she flung spear after spear at
Chukeroo, Wonga ran through the trees and came behind her.  His foot
struck against her own digging-stick, and he picked it up and rushed at
her.  The point caught in her shining scales, and ripped them up as
though they were paper.  They fell in tatters about her.

"Do not kill me!" she cried.  "I am a chief's daughter!"

"A chief's daughter, are you?" said Wonga.  Suddenly his angry face
grew soft with pity.  "Why, I thought you a demon," he said--"and lo!
you are only a poor, frightened little girl!"

      *      *      *      *      *

So the wanderings of Yillin came to an end, and though she missed
happiness with Arawotya in the sky, yet, as Wonkawala had said in her
vision, she found it elsewhere.  For Wonga took her home and married
her, and his tribe treated her with honour because she was the daughter
of a mighty chief; and later on, Wonga became the chief of his own
tribe, and she helped him to rule it in wisdom.  Very often she was
lonely for her four sisters, especially for little Peeka, whom she had
loved best of all: but she comforted herself by thinking that they were
happy with Arawotya in the sky, and that some day she would find them
again.  Then, together, they would go at the last to Pund-jel, Maker of
Men, and join their father Wonkawala.  There were five stars in the
southern sky that she liked to watch, for she grew to believe that they
were her sisters, and that the tiniest of the five was her little dog
Dulderana.  They are the stars of the Southern Cross.  And it seemed to
Yillin that they looked down at her and smiled.

Otherwise, Yillin was never lonely, for many children came to her and
Wonga, and her wurley always seemed full of jolly black babies and wee
lasses and lads.  Yillin did not mind however many there were,
especially as she did not have to worry about clothes for them.  They
grew into strong, merry boys and girls, who loved dancing and songs and
laughter just as she had always loved them.  She used to tell them the
story of her wanderings, and when she came to the part about the silver
scales that had once covered her, they would pretend to hunt for them
on her black skin, and would laugh very much because they could never
find any.  And Wonga would laugh too, and say, "Ah, well, many men find
their wives demons after they have married them, so I was lucky in only
thinking that of mine beforehand--and then finding I had made a
mistake!"




XI

THE BURNING OF THE CROWS

No one in the Bush ever had a good word to say for the Crows.  From the
very earliest times they were a noisy, mischievous race, always poking
their strong beaks into what did not concern them, and never so happy
as when they were annoying other people.  Whatever a mother Crow taught
her chickens, civility and good manners were not included in the
lessons; they were accomplishments for which none of the family had the
slightest use.

It did not at all trouble the Wokala, as the Crows were called, that
they were unpopular.  Indeed, they rather gloried in the amount of
ill-feeling they were able to excite among the Bush folk.  They were
powerful birds, well able to hold their own in any quarrel with birds
of their own size, and so quick and daring that they would even steal
from animals, or attack weak ones, secure in the advantage given them
by their strong wings.  They made so many enemies, however, that they
took to going about in flocks, so that no one dared molest them--not
even Wildoo, the Eagle, or Kellelek, the Cockatoo.

Especially did Wildoo hate the Wokala.  He was always proud, as the
King of the Birds has every right to be, and among all birds that fly
his word was law.  He liked to keep good order, and if any bird
displeased him, a few quiet words, possibly accompanied by a discreet
peck, or a blow from one of his great wings, was more than enough to
bring the offender to his senses.  One day he had occasion to punish
one of the Wokala, who had stolen the meal laboriously provided by the
wife of Wook-ook, the Mopoke, for her husband, who was ill.  The
Wokala, battered and furious, flew away and told his story to the other
Crows; who, equally furious, flew in a mob to the high crag where
Wildoo had his nest.  There was no one there, for it was too late in
the season to find chickens: so the Wokala amused themselves by
scattering the nest to pieces, and when Wildoo and his wife came home
from hunting they hid among the bushes and screamed all sorts of
insulting things at them.  Wildoo took no notice, openly.  It would
have been beneath his dignity to go hunting smaller birds in thick
bushes--which the Wokala very well knew.  He merely folded his wings
and, with his wife, perched on the edge of the rocky shelf where his
nest had been, and stared out across the tossing green sea of gum-trees
that clothed the rolling hills below, his yellow eyes full of silent
anger.  Gradually the Wokala grew tired of screaming, and, becoming
hungry, flew away.

After that the Wokala became more insolent than ever.  Even Wildoo was
afraid of them, they said; and they kept together in a mob, and lost no
chance of being rude to him.  More and more they attacked and insulted
the other birds, until no one felt safe if there were any chance of the
evil Wokala coming near.  Again and again complaints came to Wildoo of
their wicked doings, and Wildoo heard them in silence, nodding his
head, with his brain busy behind his yellow eyes.  But he said nothing:
until at length the other birds began to ask themselves was it really
true that Wildoo was afraid?  Wildoo was not at all afraid of a flock
of squawking Wokala.  But he was very much afraid of being made to look
ridiculous.  He had no intention of making a false step, and he did not
quite know what to do.  There was no one for him to talk to, for the
Eagle is a lonely bird--not like Chirnip, the Magpie-Lark, or Tautani,
the Cormorant, with dozens and dozens of friends.  He is a king, and
therefore he is lonely: and, being naturally silent, he does not talk
much, even to his wife.  All by himself he had to think out the problem
of what to do about the Wokala; and, meanwhile, the Wokala perched
above his nest and insulted him, and dropped bits of stick down upon
his rocky shelf, and screamed rude things at his wife, until she said
crossly to Wildoo, "I cannot think why you do not make an end of those
abominable little white birds.  They are a disgrace to any decent
Kingdom, and you have not the spirit of a Bandicoot!"  This annoyed and
hurt Wildoo, but he said nothing--only looked at her until she caught a
gleam of fire in the depths of his yellow eyes.

Perhaps you did not know that in the very early times all the Wokala
were white?  They were the whitest of all the birds of the Bush,
without a single grey or coloured feather in all their bodies: so that
there was a saying in the Bush, "As white as a Wokala."  They were very
proud of it, too, and thought it quite a disgrace if one of their
chickens showed a sign of being even creamy in colour, once he was
nearly fledged.  They kept themselves very clean, going often to bathe;
and when they flew about in a flock their dazzling whiteness almost
hurt the eye, while, if they perched in a dead gum-tree, they looked
like big snowflakes against the grey branches.  Even Kellelek, the
Cockatoo, was dingy compared to the gleaming whiteness of the Wokala.
Somehow, it seemed to make their bad behaviour worse, since no one
would expect a beautiful bird like polished marble to have the manners
of a jungle pig.

Summer ended early that year, with a great thunder-storm, followed by a
month of wild wind and driving rain: and all the birds were rather
uncomfortable because the moulting season was scarcely over.  Most of
all, the Wokala were annoyed.  They liked their white feathers so much,
and were so proud of their smart appearance, that they always delayed
moulting as long as ever they could; and now the bad weather caught
them in a worse state than the other birds.  When the rains ended,
early frosts came, and found the Wokala without any of their new
feather cloaks ready.  They used to huddle together among the thickest
trees, shivering and untidy.

In that part of the country there is a great black ironstone hill,
treeless and forbidding.  Few birds go there, for there is nowhere to
perch, and but little food except the tiny rock-lizards that sun
themselves in the hot mornings.  Wildoo knew it well, for he often flew
over it, and occasionally he was accustomed to stand on a shelf at the
mouth of a cave near the top--a black hole in the hillside where no one
but an Eagle would willingly perch alone.  He took refuge in the cave
one morning, during a fierce hail-storm; and it was there that an idea
came to him.

That night as he came flying homewards, he brought in his great talons
a bundle of dry sticks, and as he flapped his way over the black
ironstone hill, he dropped down on the ledge and made a heap of his
sticks on the floor of the cave.  The next morning he did the same: and
so it went on for many days, until he had a big pile of smooth sticks,
something like a great nest.  His wife came with him one evening, and
was very much amused.

"Why have you taken to playing with sticks?" she asked, laughing.  "I
never saw such a funny heap.  Is it a game?"  But Wildoo only looked at
her sourly, and said, "Be quiet, woman!" after the manner of husbands:
and since she was more sensible than most wives, she was quiet.

It was after his heap of sticks was ready that Wildoo went to look for
the Wokala.  They had been far too uncomfortable lately to continue to
be rude to him, and, in fact, were keeping out of the way of every one;
so that he had some difficulty in finding them, and might have given it
up but for Corridella, the Eagle-hawk, who remembered having seen them
near a sheltered gully between two hills.

"They are cold," said Corridella, laughing, "oh, so cold, and so sorry
for themselves.  There is no impudence left in them."

"Cold indeed must be the night that chills the impudence of the
Wokala," said Wildoo.

"It is going to be a very cold night," said Corridella.  "Already there
is a sharp nip of frost in the air.  I think that some of the Wokala
will be dead before morning, for none of them have their new feather
cloaks nearly ready."  He chuckled.  "Well, no one in the Bush will
mourn for them.  Perhaps they will realize now that it does not pay to
make enemies of every one."

"The Wokala will never learn a lesson," answered Wildoo.  "They are
always satisfied with themselves: and even though some may die, the
others will forget all about it, once they have their shining white
cloaks and can flock into the tree-tops again.  But possibly they may
not be so lucky--who can tell?"  He also chuckled, looking as wise as
an owl.  But when Corridella asked him what he meant, he pretended to
go to sleep: and Corridella, who knew better than to pester an Eagle
with too many questions, said good evening and sailed homeward across
the tree-tops.

Left to himself, Wildoo waited until no bird was in sight, and then
flapped heavily away from his rocky shelf, and dived downward to the
gully.  It did not take him long to find the Wokala.  They did not
gleam with the whiteness of snow, for they were moulting and very
shabby, and a few were dressed mainly in pin-feathers; but their voices
were just as harsh as ever, and guided Wildoo to where they were
huddling among some she-oak trees.  Already a cold wind was whistling
down between the hills, sighing and moaning in the she-oak branches.
There is no tree in all Australia so mournful as the she-oak on a cold
night, when each long needle seems to sing a separate little song of
woe.  Already the miserable Wokala were sorry that they had chosen to
roost there.

Suddenly, great wings darkened the evening sky above them, and, looking
up, they saw Wildoo.  He perched on a limb of a dead gum-tree far
overhead, and looked down at them, laughing.  There seemed, to the
shivering Wokala, something very terrible in the sound of his laughter.

"Kwah!" they whispered.  "Wildoo has found us.  Now he will be
revenged."  They knew they could not fly swiftly enough to escape him,
and they began to creep downwards, hoping to hide among the bracken
fern that clothed the gully.  But Wildoo called to them, and, to their
astonishment, his voice sounded friendly.

"Oh, Wokala!" he cried.  "Are you very cold?"

"Ay, we are cold," said the Wokala, as well as they could, for their
beaks were chattering with fear and shivering.

"No wonder, seeing how little you have on," said Wildoo.  "A pity you
did not get your new white feather cloaks ready earlier, instead of
spending your time in annoying honest folk.  Well, perhaps you will
have more sense next year."

"Doubtless we shall, if we live," said the oldest Wokala.  "But it
seems likely that not many of us will live, for we are nearly frozen
already."

"How distressing for you!" said Wildoo--"especially as it will be far
colder before morning than it is now.  These gullies are the chilliest
places in the Bush on a frosty night."

The beaks of the Wokala chattered anew.

"We came for shelter," said the old Wokala miserably.  "But you say
truth, Wildoo: I think the Frost-Spirit has his home down here.  Is it
any warmer where you are?"

"Very little," said Wildoo--"and the wind is singing through these
branches.  But I know of a sheltered place, for all that."

"Kwah!" said the Wokala, all together.  "A sheltered place!  Oh,
Wildoo, you are great and--and--and beautiful.  Will you not tell us
where it is?"

"Great and beautiful, am I?" said Wildoo, with a chuckle.  "That is not
the sort of thing you have been calling me all these months.  However,
it is lucky for you that I am also good-natured; I would not willingly
see any of my people die of cold, not even the Wokala, who deserve
little of anyone."

"Then you will tell us where is the sheltered place?" chattered the
Wokala.

"Fly across to the Black Mountain," said Wildoo.  "There is an
ironstone wurley near the top--I will guide you to it, if you like.  It
is big enough for you all, and there is a fine heap of sticks on which
to perch.  The wind will not blow inside it, and the morning sun will
shine right into it."

"It sounds too wonderful to be true," said the Wokala.  "Is it dry,
this ironstone wurley?"

"Dry as old bones," answered Wildoo.  "Oh, you would be in luck to get
there--you would forget all your troubles."

"One would think that impossible," shivered the old Wokala--he was very
sorry for himself.  "But if you will really guide us there, then be
quick, Wildoo, or none of us will be able to fly at all."

"Very well," Wildoo answered.  "I will go slowly, as I suppose you are
all stiff.  Follow me, and come down when you see me perch."

He spread his great wings and looked down at them for a moment with a
little smile; and if they had not been so eager and so cold they might
have hesitated at the expression in his yellow eyes.  But, as usual,
the Wokala thought only of themselves, and as they had learned to
believe that Wildoo was afraid of them, they never suspected that he
might be leading them into a trap.  They cried "Kwah!  Kwah!" and rose
into the air after him as soon as the flapping of the mighty wings told
them that he had left the gum-tree.  Even to fly slowly was difficult,
so stiff with cold were they: but they all persevered, except one young
hen--a pretty young thing, whose weary wings would not do their duty.
She made a brave attempt to rise, but before the flight had cleared the
big dead gum-tree she had to drop back--thankful to find a secure perch
on a jutting limb.

"Ky!" she whimpered.  "I can never fly all the way to the Black
Mountain.  I must die here."

She crept along the limb until she came to the trunk, and there luck
awaited her.  In the fork was an old 'possum-hole which had not been
used for many seasons.  It was dry and warm--sheltered from the bitter
wind, and soft underfoot with rotting leaves, pleasant to the touch.
The young Wokala hopped in thankfully, and it seemed the last touch to
her wonderful good fortune that she immediately met a fine fat grub.
She promptly ate it for her supper, tucked her head under her wing,
nestled into the farthest corner, and went to sleep, remarking
drowsily, "This is better than all Wildoo's ironstone wurleys!"

The other Wokala did not notice that the young hen had dropped back--or
if they did they did not worry about her.  Weary as they were, it took
all their strength to keep Wildoo in sight, even though he kept his
word and flew slowly.  They were thankful when at length he sank lower
and came to rest on a big boulder by the mouth of the cave near the
mountain-top.  The Wokala followed him in a straggling line, and
perched on the shelf outside the cave.

"There you are," Wildoo said, nodding towards the yawning hole in the
hillside.  "That is your ironstone wurley, and I will promise you that
you will find it dry and free from draughts."

"There is nothing living there?" asked the old Wokala, looking a little
doubtfully at the cave.

"Nothing at all.  All you will find there is a heap of dry sticks; you
can perch there and keep each other warm.  Stay there, if you like it
well enough, until your new feather cloaks are ready--you are really
scarcely fit for decent society now."  Wildoo cast a half-contemptuous
glance at the shivering, half-fledged birds, as they clustered on the
rocky shelf.  Then he flew off again into the gathering darkness.

"Whatever is Wildoo about?" asked Kellelek, the Cockatoo, of his hens.
"He seems to be leading all the Wokala round the sky.  A funny nurse he
looked, and with a funny lot of chickens!"

"No wonder he waited for dusk before he would be seen with them," said
one of his wives contemptuously.  "I flew by their tree to-day, and
really, they were a positive disgrace.  And they always think
themselves so smart!"

"Oh, they'll be smart enough again," said Kellelek, laughing.  "Wait
until they have their new feathers on, and you will be just as jealous
of them as ever you were.  There is no doubt that the Wokala are
smart--that is, for people who prefer plain white.  I like a good
sulphur crest myself--but then, it's all a matter of opinion."

"Well, don't let the Wokala know that you admire them, or they will be
worse than ever," said his wives, ruffling their feathers angrily.

Meanwhile, the Wokala had hesitated just for a moment before entering
the cave.  Then a fresh blast of cold wind swept across the face of the
mountain, and they waited no longer, but fluttered in before it, in a
hurrying, jostling flock.  It was just as Wildoo had told them: warm
and dry, and with a big heap of dry sticks in the middle--just the
thing for them to perch on.  They hopped up eagerly, huddling together
for warmth, scrambling and fighting for the best places.  Soon they
were all comfortably settled, and at last warmth began to steal back
into their shivering bodies.

"A good thing we made Wildoo afraid of us," said one sleepily.
"Otherwise we should never have known of this splendid wurley."  The
others uttered drowsy murmurs of "Kwah!" as they drifted into slumber.

But far away on his mountain shelf Wildoo sat and waited, his yellow
eyes wide and wakeful.  The dusk deepened into night, and far off, from
his perch on a tall stringy bark tree, old Wook-ook, the Mopoke, sent
out his long cry, "Mo--poke!  Mo--poke!"  Presently came a dim radiance
in the east and Wildoo stirred a little.

"Peera comes," he muttered.

Peera, the Moon, came up slowly, until all the Bush was flooded with
her dim light, falling into shadow now and then, when dark clouds
drifted across her face.  Wildoo waited until she was above the
tree-tops, with her beams falling upon the ironstone mountain.  Then he
took a fire-stick in his talons and flew swiftly away, never pausing
until he alighted on the shelf before the cave.

He laid the fire-stick down and went softly to the dark opening,
listening.  There came only the sound of the breathing of the Wokala,
with now and then a muffled caw as one dreamed, perhaps, of cold and
hunger.  As his eyes grew accustomed to the light, Wildoo could see
them--a huddled white mass upon the heap of sticks.  That was all he
wanted, and he went back swiftly for his fire-stick, and with it went
into the cave.  Very softly he slipped it into the dry heart of the
heap of sticks below the sleeping Wokala.  He waited until little
smoke-wreaths began to curl up, and a faint glow came from within the
heap.

"Now you will be warm enough, my friends!" he muttered.  He hurried out
of the cave, and flew slowly to the nearest tree, on the hill opposite
the Black Mountain.  There he perched and waited.  Very soon all the
dark mouth of the cave was filled with glowing radiance, and clouds of
smoke came billowing out and rolled down the hill.  Then came loud and
terrified cawing, and Wildoo thought he could see dark forms fluttering
out through the smoke.  His yellow eyes gleamed at the sight.  And then
clouds came suddenly across the face of the Moon, and a fierce wind
blew, with driving rain that beat into the mouth of the cave.  It
blotted out the glow, and the wind carried away the cries.  When all
was quiet Wildoo flapped off to his nest.

He was back next morning on the boulder outside the cave, and with him
all the birds of the Bush, whom he had collected as he came, saying to
them, "Come and see what happens to those who insult Wildoo."  The
black mouth of the ironstone cave looked grim and forbidding, and,
peering in, the birds could see the charred ends of the dry sticks,
scattered on the floor round a heap of ashes.  Then, from the inner
recesses of the cave came a strange procession, and at the sight the
Kooka burra burst into a peal of laughter.  For it was the Wokala.

They came slowly--but where were their white feathers, of which they
had been so proud?  All were gone, singed off close to their bodies;
and their bodies were blackened with smoke.  Queer, naked birds they
looked, creeping out into the sunshine, and there was no pride left in
them.  They looked up and saw Wildoo and the laughing birds of all the
Bush; and with a loud miserable cawing they fled back into the cave.

No one saw the Wokala again for a time.  But after a long while they
came out again, this time with all their feathers fully grown.  No
longer, however, were they white--the whitest of all birds.  Their new
feathers were a glossy black!

They looked at each other for a moment with a kind of horror.  Then
they rose into the air with a swift beating of their jet-black wings,
and, calling "Kwah!  Kwah!" they fled across the sky.  And as they flew
another cawing was heard, and a white bird rose and flew to meet
them--the Wokala hen who had been left behind, and who had taken refuge
in the 'possum-hole.  She was now the only white Wokala left in all the
world.  They met in mid-air, and at sight of the strange black birds
with the familiar voices the white Wokala uttered a scream and fled
away, never to be seen again.

Since then, always the Crows have been black.  They found their old
impudence again after a while, and became what they had been when they
were white--always the nuisances of the Bush, vagabonds and robbers and
bullies.  But still the terror of the ironstone wurley is upon them,
and they never venture into caves, but live in the big trees, where
they can see far and wide, and where no creeping enemy can come upon
them in the darkness.  And Wildoo, the King of the Birds, never finds
them near his nest, nor need he ever speak to them.  One glance from
him is enough for the Wokala: they would fly to the deepest recesses of
the Bush rather than face the gleam of his yellow eyes.




XII

KUR-BO-ROO, THE BEAR

CHAPTER I

Kur-bo-roo was a little black boy baby.  His father and mother had no
other children, and so they were very proud of him, and he always had
enough to eat.  It is often very different when there are many hungry
pickaninnies to be fed--especially in dry seasons, when roots and yams
and berries are hard to find, and a black mother's task of filling her
dilly-bag becomes more difficult every day.  Then it may happen that
the children are quite often hungry, and their ribs show plainly
through their black skins: and they learn to pick up all kinds of odd
food that white children would consider horrible--insects, grubs, and
moths, and queer fungi, which may sometimes give them bad
pains--although it is not an easy thing to give a black child
indigestion.

But Kur-bo-roo had not known any hard times.  He was born a cheerful,
round baby, quite light in colour at first; and as he darkened he
became rounder and jollier.  His hair curled in tight little rings all
over his head, and his nose was beautifully flat--so flat that his
mother did not need to press it down to make him good-looking, as most
of the black mothers do to their babies.  He was very strong, too, with
a straight little back and well-muscled limbs; and when his teeth came
they could crunch up bones quite easily, or even the hard nardoo
berries.  His mother thought he was the most beautiful pickaninny that
was ever born, which is an idea all mothers have about their babies.
But Kur-bo-roo's mother _knew_ that she was right.

He had so many good things to eat that he grew fatter and fatter.  His
father brought home game--wallaby, wombat, iguana, lace-lizards,
porcupines, bandicoots, opossums; and though it was polite to give away
a good deal to his wife's father, there was always plenty for little
Kur-bo-roo.  Then delicious bits of snake came his way, and long white
tree-grubs, as well as all the native fruits and berries that the black
women find; and he had plenty of creek water to drink.  So long as you
give a wild blackfellow good water he will always manage to forage for
food.

Kur-bo-roo did not have to forage.  It interested his father and mother
tremendously to do all that they could for him, and watch him grow.  As
soon as he could toddle about, his father made him tiny throwing-sticks
and a boomerang, and tried to teach him to throw them; and his mother,
squatting in the shade of the wurley, would laugh to see the baby thing
struggling with the weapons of a man.  And, while she laughed, she was
prouder than ever.  She used to rub his limbs to make them supple and
strong.  He did not wear any clothes at all, so that she was never
worried about keeping his wardrobe in order.  Instead, she was able to
give all her time to making him into what she thought to be the best
possible kind of boy.  And, however that may have been, it is quite
certain that there never was a happier pickaninny.

It was when Kur-bo-roo was nearly six years old that the evil spirit of
Trouble came to him.

Sickness fell upon the tribe.  No one knew how it came, and the
medicine-men could not drive it away.  First of all, the people had
terrible headaches, and the Meki-gar, or doctor, used to treat them in
the usual manner--he would dig out a round sod of earth and, making the
patient lie down with his head in the hole, would put the sod on his
head, and stand on it, or sit on it, to squeeze out the pain.  If this
were not successful, he would tie a cord tightly round the patient's
head, and cut him with a sharp shell or flint, beating his head with a
little stick to make the blood flow freely.  These excellent measures
had in the past cured many severe headaches.  But they could not cure
the sickness now.

So the Meki-gar had the patient carried out of the camp.  The bearers
carried him slowly, singing a mournful chant; and behind them came all
the sick man's friends, sweeping the ground with boughs, to sweep away
the bad power that had caused the disease.  This bad power was, the
Meki-gar said, the work of a terrible being called Bori.  But, whether
it was Bori's fault, or whether the tribe had simply brought sickness
on themselves by allowing the camp to become very dirty, the Meki-gar
could not drive away the sickness.  It grew worse and worse, and people
died every day.

Kur-bo-roo was only a little lad, but he was unhappy and frightened,
although he did not understand at all.  The air was always full of the
sound of the groaning and crying of those people who were ill, and of
lamenting and mourning for the dead.  Everybody was terribly afraid.
The blacks believed that their bad spirits were angry with them, and
that nothing could do them any good; and so, many died from sheer
fright, thinking that once they were taken ill they were doomed, and
that it was no good to make a fight against the mysterious enemy.  That
was stupid, but they did not know any better.

Then there came a heavy rain, and after it was over, and the sun had
come out to smile upon a fresh, clean world, the sickness began to get
better and pass away.  But just at the last, it came to the wurley
where Kur-bo-roo lived with his father and mother.

Kur-bo-roo could not understand why his parents could not get up and go
to find food.  They lay in the wurley together, shivering under all the
'possum rugs and talking quickly in queer, high voices that he could
not make out at all.  They called often for water, and he brought it to
them in his little tarnuk, or drinking-vessel, going backwards and
forwards to the creek, and up and down its banks, until his little legs
were very tired.  Long after he was tired he kept on going for water.
Then there came a time when they could not lift the tarnuk, and he
tried to hold it to their lips, so that they could drink; but he was
not very successful, and much of the water was spilt.  You see, he was
only a very little, afraid boy.

He woke up one morning, cold and hungry.  There was no more food in the
wurley, and no voices: only a great silence.  He crept under the
'possum rug to his father and mother, but they were quite still, and
when he called to them, they did not answer.  He rubbed their cold
faces with a shaking little hand, but no warmth came to them.  Then he
broke into loud, frightened crying, like any other lonely little boy.

Presently some of the blacks came to the wurley and pointed at the
quiet bodies under the 'possum rug, and jabbered very hard, beckoning
to others to come.  Kur-bo-roo heard them say "tumble-down" a great
many times, and he knew that it meant "dead"; but he did not know that
his father and mother would never speak to him any more.  Only when an
old woman picked him up and carried him away he understood that a
terrible thing had happened to him, and he cried more bitterly than
ever, calling to his mother.  She had always run to him when he called.
But now she did not come.



CHAPTER II

After that, hard times came upon little Kur-bo-roo.  There were none of
his own family left, for the sickness had taken them all.  His father
and mother had been the last to die, and that made the blacks think
that very probably Bori, the Evil Spirit, had been especially angry
with Kur-bo-roo's family, because so many of them had died and the last
terrible blow of the disease had fallen on their wurley.  Indeed, for
awhile they argued as to whether it would not be better to kill
Kur-bo-roo too, so that so troublesome a family should be quite stamped
out, with no further chance of annoying Bori and bringing trouble upon
the tribe.  They did not spare him out of any idea of pity; but because
so many men and boys had died that the tribe had become seriously
weakened, and it seemed foolish to kill a strong and healthy fellow
like Kur-bo-roo.  It was very important for a tribe to keep up its
fighting strength, for there was always a chance that another band of
blacks might come upon them and want to fight: in which case the weaker
tribe might be swallowed up.  So boy babies were thought a good deal
of, and for that reason the blacks did not make an end of little
Kur-bo-roo.

But he had a very bad time, for all that.  No one wanted him.  He was
nobody's boy; and that hurts just the same whether a boy be black or
white.  Never was there so lonely a little fellow.  The other children
were half afraid of him, because the fear of Bori's anger yet hung
about him; they would not let him join in their games, and took a
savage delight in hunting him away from their wurleys.  Another black
family had taken possession of his father's wurley, and no home was
left to him.  He used to wander about miserably, often sleeping in the
open air, curled up in the shadow of a bush, or in a hollow tree-stump.
If it were cold or wet, he would creep noiselessly into a hut when he
thought every one would be asleep--and quite often he was kicked out
again.

He was always hungry now.  His father and mother had taken such care of
him, and had loved so much to keep him fed, that he had never learned
how to find food for himself.  He would wander about in the Bush,
looking for such things as his mother had brought him, but he knew so
little that often he ate quite the wrong things, which made him very
sick.  He learned a good deal about food in that way, but the learning
was not pleasant work.

It was a bad year for food.  Dry weather had come, and game was scarce;
it was hard for the fighting-men to bring home enough for their own
children, without having to provide for a hungry boy of six who
belonged to nobody.  Kur-bo-roo used to hang about the cooking-places
in the hope of having scraps of food thrown to him, but not many came
his way.  When so many were hungry the food was quickly eaten up.
Sometimes a woman, pitying the shrinking little lad, would hastily toss
him a bone or a fragment of meat; and though you would not have cared
for the way it was cooked, Kur-bo-roo thought that these morsels were
the most delicious he had ever tasted.

You see, a wild blackfellow has not much to think about except food.
He has no schools, no daily papers, no market days, or picture shows,
or telephones.  The wild Bush is his, and all he asks or expects of it
is that it shall supply him with food.  He knows that it means strength
to him, and that strength means happiness, as a rule, when all that he
has depends upon his own ability to keep it for himself.  He does not
reason things that way, for the blackfellow is simple, but he just eats
as much as he can whenever he can get it, and that seems to agree with
him excellently.  That was the principle on which Kur-bo-roo had been
brought up, and it had made him the round, black, shiny baby that he
had been until his parents died.

He was not nearly so round and shiny now.  His little body was thin and
hard, and he did not look so strong as before.  It was not altogether
lack of food that had weakened him--the want of happiness had a great
deal to do with it.

He had found out that the tribe did not like him.  Not only was he
nobody's boy, but he was the object of a kind of distrust that he could
feel without at all understanding it; and he had learnt to shrink and
cringe from blows and bitter words.  Once he had found a lace-lizard
asleep on a rock, and, grasping his tiny waddy, had stolen up to it
very carefully, all the instinct of the hunter blazing in his dark, sad
eyes.  The lizard, when it woke, was quick, but Kur-bo-roo was
quicker--the stick came down with all the force of his arm, and he
carried off his prey in triumph, meaning to ask a woman who had
sometimes been kind to him if she would cook it for him.  But just
outside the camp three big boys had come upon him as he was carrying
his prey, and that had been the last that Kur-bo-roo had seen of his
lizard.  He had fought for it like a little tiger--quite hopelessly, of
course, but to fight had been a kind of dismal satisfaction to him,
even though he was badly beaten in addition to losing his dinner; and
that was specially unfortunate, for blacks think lizard a very great
delicacy indeed.  The boys ran off with it, jeering at the sobbing
little figure on the ground; and they called him names that, even in
his angry soreness, made him think.  They said something to do with an
evil spirit--he pondered over it, creeping into a clump of bushes.  Why
should they call him that?

Blacks always want a reason for any happening.  Sometimes they are
satisfied with very foolish reasons; but they must have something to
explain occurrences, especially if they are unpleasant ones.  The
sickness that had fallen on their tribe they put down to Bori, as the
medicine-man told them; but when the sickness had gone, it seemed only
reasonable to believe that Bori was satisfied and would leave them
alone for awhile.  So they could not understand why misfortune should
still pursue them.  Another tribe had stolen part of their country, and
they had been too weakened by the sickness to fight for it; and now had
come the drought, making food harder than ever to obtain, and causing
some of the babies to fall sick and die.  They turned to the magic-men
or sorcerers for explanation, and these clever people performed a great
many extraordinary tricks to make things better.  Then, as they were
really hard up for some object on which to throw the blame of their
failure, it occurred to them to turn suspicion towards little
Kur-bo-roo.

Kur-bo-roo went on with his unhappy little life, quite ignorant of the
storms gathering round his woolly head.  No one was ever kind to him,
and he could scarcely distinguish one day from another; although he
gathered a vague idea that in some way they were linking his name with
the Evil Spirit, he did not understand what that meant.  He kept on
hunting round for food and water, and dodging blows and angry faces.
If he had guessed that the magic-men were busily persuading the people
that his family and he were the cause of the terrible year through
which they had passed, he might have been more uneasy; but, in any
case, he was only a very little boy, and perhaps he would not have
understood.  He had enough troubles to think of without looking out for
more.



CHAPTER III

Then the worst part of the drought happened, for the creek began to run
dry.

Day after day it ran a little more slowly, and the deep holes at the
bends shrank and dwindled away.  The fish disappeared completely,
having swum down-stream to where deeper waters awaited them; and so
another source of food was lost to the tribe.  There only remained the
black mud-eels, and soon it was hard to find any of these, try as they
might.  That was bad, but it was nothing in comparison to the loss of
the water supply.  Without the creek, the tribe could not exist, for
the only other drinking-places in their country were swamps and
morasses, and these, too, were dried up and useless.  So the magic-men
and head-men became very anxious, and many were the black glances cast
upon the unconscious Kur-bo-roo as he slunk round the camp or hunted
for food in the scrub.  Then the head-men issued a command that no one
should drink from the creek itself, lest the little water remaining
should be stirred up and made muddy, or lest anyone should drink too
much.  Instead of going to the creek to drink, they were permitted to
fill their tarnuks, or drinking-vessels, each morning; and then no one
was allowed to approach the creek again that day.  So in the mornings a
long procession of women went down to the bank, where a head-man
watched them fill the tarnuks, remaining until the last had hurried
away, very much afraid of his fierce eyes.

But the new law fell very heavily on Kur-bo-roo, for he had now no
tarnuk.  The little one made for him by his father long ago had
disappeared when he lost everything, and since then he had always been
accustomed to drink at the creek.  Now, however, he could not do so,
and no one would give him a tarnuk, or let him drink from theirs.  He
would have stolen it very readily, for he was now not at all a
well-brought-up little boy, but the tarnuks were hung far beyond his
reach.

Of course, the magic-men knew how the new law would affect the little
fellow.  They knew that now it would be impossible for Kur-bo-roo to
drink, and after a little he would "tumble-down" and be dead; and then,
perhaps, the Evil Spirit would be satisfied, and go away from the
tribe.  They watched him carefully, and were glad that he became weak
and wretched.  They had uttered such savage penalties against drinking
from the creek that it never occurred to them that he would dare to
disobey.  But sometimes in the darkness Kur-bo-roo used to creep down
for a drink, being, indeed, as desperate as a boy can be, and quite
sure that unless he went he must die; and he had become so stealthy in
his movements that he was never caught.  It did not satisfy his thirst,
of course, for it was the hottest part of the summer, and all the
blacks were accustomed to drinking a great deal: still, it was
something.  At least, it kept him alive.

Then, one morning, came news of a number of kangaroo feeding two miles
away by the creek, and all the camp fell into a state of tremendous
excitement at the very idea of such a chance of food.  All the men and
big boys dashed off at once, and presently the women made up their
minds that they would follow them, as it was not at all unlikely that
if the men had good luck in their hunt they might immediately sit down
and eat a great portion of the game they had killed--in which case
there was only a poor look-out for those left in camp.  So they
gathered up their dilly-bags and sticks, slung the babies on their
backs, and ran off into the Bush after the men, leaving the camp
deserted.

Now, it chanced that Kur-bo-roo knew nothing of all this.  He had not
spent the night in camp, because, on the evening before, he had been
savagely beaten by two big boys, who had caught him alone in the scrub,
and when they had finished with him he was too sick and sore to crawl
back to the wurleys.  He had crept under a bush, and slept there
uneasily, for the pain of his bruises kept waking him up.  The sun was
quite high in the sky before he made up his mind to go back to the
camp, in the faint hope that some one would give him food.  So he
limped slowly through the Bush, wincing when the harsh boughs rubbed
against his sore limbs.

He stopped at the edge of the camp and rubbed his fists into his eyes,
blinking in surprise.  No one was in sight; instead of the hum and
bustle of the camp, the men sitting about carving their spears and
throwing-sticks, the women chattering round the wurleys, the babies
rolling on the ground and playing with the dogs, there was only
desolation and silence.  He approached one hut after another, and poked
in a timid head, but he saw no one, and the stillness seemed almost
terrible to him.  Then, in a corner of one wurley he saw a rush-basket,
and from it came a smell that would have been disgusting to anyone but
a black, but was pure delight to Kur-bo-roo.  His fear vanished as he
seized upon the food and ate it ravenously.

He came out presently, his thin little body not nearly so hollow as
before, and looked about him.  The food had made him feel better, but
he was terribly thirsty.  And then he saw, with a little glad shout,
that all about the camp were drinking-vessels, brimming with water--put
down wherever their owners had happened to be when they had rushed away
to the hunt.  Kur-bo-roo did not know anything about that, of course;
he only knew that here was water enough to make him forget that he had
ever been thirsty.  He ran eagerly to the nearest tarnuk and drank and
drank until he could drink no more.

And with that drink, so the blacks say, a great change came upon little
Kur-bo-roo.

Kur-bo-roo put down the tarnuk and stood upright, throwing his head
back in sheer bodily happiness at once more having had enough to eat
and drink.  All his bruises and soreness had suddenly gone; he was no
longer tired and lonely and unhappy, but strong and well and glad.  How
wonderfully strong he felt!  A new feeling ran through all his body.

"I am stronger than anybody ever was before!" he said aloud.  And he
believed that it was true.

He glanced round the deserted camp.  It was quiet now, but he felt sure
that soon the blacks would come hurrying back.  Perhaps they would be
there in a moment: Kur-bo-roo listened, half dreading to hear the quick
pad-pad of bare feet over the hard, baked ground.  No sound came.  But
he knew that they would return: and then, what would await him?

His new strength seemed to burn him.  He stretched his arms out,
wondering at their hard muscles, although he felt that the drink had
been Magic, and so he need not wonder at anything at all.  Some good
Spirit, perhaps sorry for lonely little boys, had evidently come to
help him.  Fear suddenly left him altogether, and with its going came a
mighty desire for revenge.  He did not know what he was going to do,
but the new power that was in him urged him on.

A little tree grew in front of him.  He began to gather up all the
drinking-vessels, and, one by one, to hang them upon the boughs.  There
were very many, and it took a long time, but at last the task was
completed, and not a tarnuk was left in the camp.  He looked in the
wurleys, and found many empty vessels, and these also he hung up in the
tree.  Then he took the biggest tarnuk of all, and a little tarnuk, and
went down to the creek: and with the little tarnuk he filled the big
one, dipping up all the water from the creek, until there was none
left.  There was much water, yet still the big tarnuk held it all, and
only the mud of the creek-bed remained where the stream had been
rippling past.  Even as he looked, that grew dry and hard.  Then
Kur-bo-roo turned and carried his burden up the bank to his tree, and
from the big tarnuk he filled all the empty ones.  They held a great
deal, and yet the big tarnuk remained quite full.  For now there was
Magic in everything that Kur-bo-roo touched.

He climbed up into the little tree and seated himself comfortably in a
fork, where he could see everything, and yet lean back comfortably.  A
quiver ran through the tree, as if something far underground had shaken
it; and suddenly it began to grow.  It grew and grew, spreading wide
arms to the sky, until it was as large as very many big trees all put
together: and its trunk was tall and straight and very smooth.  All the
time, Kur-bo-roo sat in the fork and smiled.

When the tree had finished growing, he heard a sound of voices far
below him, and, looking down, he saw the tribe hurrying back through
the scrub to their camp.  Their hunt had been unsuccessful, for all the
kangaroo had got away into the country of another tribe, where they
dared not follow: so they were returning, hungry and thirsty, and in a
very bad temper, for they had not found any water in the places where
they had been.  They came angrily back to the camp, and from his seat
in the fork of the great tree Kur-bo-roo looked down at them and smiled.

The blacks were far too thirsty to look up at any tree.  They hurried
to the wurleys.  Then the first said, "Where is my tarnuk?" and another
said, "Wah! my tarnuk has gone!" and a third, "Who has taken all our
tarnuks?"  They became very angry, and beat their wives because they
could find no drinking-vessels and no water: then, becoming desperate
because of their thirst, they hurried to the creek.  And lo! the creek
was dry!  They came back from the creek, jabbering and afraid,
believing that the Evil Spirits had done this wonderful thing.
Presently one saw the big tree, and cried out in astonishment.

"Ky!  What tree is that?" he exclaimed.

They gathered round, staring in amazement at the huge tree: and so they
saw all their tarnuks hanging in its branches, and little Kur-bo-roo
sitting smiling in the fork.

"Wah! is that you?" they called.  "Have you any water?"

"Yes, here am I, and I have plenty of water," said Kur-bo-roo.  "But I
will not give you one drop, because you would give me none, although I
died of thirst."

Some threatened him, and some begged of him, and the women and children
wailed round the base of the tree.  But Kur-bo-roo smiled down at them,
and took no heed of all their anger and their crying.  Then a couple of
young men took their tomahawks of stone and began to climb the tree,
although they were afraid, because it was so big.  Still, thirst drove
them, and so they came up the tree, cutting notches for their fingers
and toes in the smooth trunk, and coming wonderfully quickly.  But
Kur-bo-roo laughed, and let fall a little water on them from a tarnuk;
and as soon as the water touched them, they fell to the ground and were
killed.

Again and again other men tried to climb the tree, becoming desperate
with their own thirst and the crying of the women and children; but
always they met the same fate.  Always Kur-bo-roo smiled, and splashed
a few drops of water upon them: only a drop on each of them, but as the
drops touched them their hold loosened, the grip of their toes relaxed,
and they fell from the great height, to meet their death on the ground
below.  So it went on until nearly all the men of the tribe were gone:
and Kur-bo-roo sat in the fork of the tree and smiled.

And it still went on, all through the moonlit night.  But in the dawn
two men came back from hunting: Ta-jerr and Tarrn-nin, the sons of
Pund-jel, Maker of Men.  They were very cunning, as well as being very
brave, and after they had taken counsel together, they began to climb
the tree.  But they did not climb as the other men had done, straight
up the long line of the smooth trunk.  Instead, they climbed round and
round, as the clematis creeps when it throws its tendrils about a
branch.

Kur-bo-rop laughed, just as he had laughed at the others, and waited
until they had ascended to a great height.  Then he took water, and let
it fall--but the men were no longer in the same place, but on the other
side, climbing round and round, and he missed them.  Again and again he
ran to get more, and poured it down; they were very quick, circling
about the trunk, and always managed to escape the falling drops.  They
came to the place where the trunk forked, and swung themselves into the
high boughs.

Then little Kur-bo-roo began to cry in a terrified voice.  But they
seized him, not heeding, and beat him until all his bones were broken,
and then threw him down.  The other blacks uttered a great shout of
triumph, and ran to kill him.

But the Magic that had helped him came to the aid of little Kur-bo-roo
once more, and so he did not die.  Suddenly, just as the angry blacks
were upon him, with uplifted waddies and threatening faces, he changed
under their gaze; and where there had been a little black boy there lay
for a moment a Native Bear, his grey fur bristling, and fear filling
his soft eyes.  Then, very swiftly, he gathered himself up and ran up a
tree, until he was out of sight among the branches.

Just then the blacks were too thirsty to pursue him.  Overhead, Ta-jerr
and Tarrn-nin were cutting at the branches of the great tree that held
the tarnuks; and all the water came out and flowed back to the creek,
and again the creek became wide and clear, running swiftly in its bed
so that there was drink for all.  Then Ta-jerr and Tarrn-nin came down
to the ground, and the tribe hailed them as heroes.  But when they
looked for little Kur-bo-roo, the Native Bear, he had fled into another
tree, and had disappeared.

From that time, the Native Bears became food for the black people.  But
it is law that they must not break their bones when they kill them, nor
must they take off their skin before they cook them.  So they take them
carefully, hitting them on the head; and they cook them by roasting
them whole in an oven of stones, sunk in the ground.  If the law were
broken, Kur-bo-roo would again become powerful, the magic-men say; and
the first thing he would do would be to dry up all the creeks.

Now, Kur-bo-roo lives near the creeks and water holes, so that if the
people broke the law he might at once carry away the water.  He is not
very wise, because he was only quite a little boy before he became a
Native Bear, and so had not much time to gain wisdom: but he is soft,
and fat, and gentle, unless you interfere with him when he wants to
climb a tree, and then he can scratch very hard with his sharp claws.
All he can do is to climb, and he does not see very well in the
daytime: therefore, he thinks that whatever he meets is a tree, and at
once he tries to climb it.  If the blacks throw things at him when he
is sitting in the fork of a tree, he blinks down at them, and sometimes
you might think he smiles.  But if they climb his tree and come near to
knock him down, he cries always, very terribly--just as he cried long
ago, when he was Magic and Ta-jerr and Tarrn-nin climbed his great tree
and threw him to the people far below.




XIII

WURIP, THE FIRE-BRINGER

CHAPTER I

Once there was a time when the blacks had no fire.  They had not
learned the way to make it by rubbing two sticks together; or if they
had once known the way, they had forgotten it.  And they were very
miserable, for it was often cold and wintry, and they had no fire to
warm them, nor any way of cooking food.

Fire had been theirs once.  But there came two women upon the Earth;
strange women, speaking in unknown tongues, with great eyes in which
there was no fear.  They did not love the blacks.  They lived in their
camps for a time, and built for themselves a wurley, coming and going
as they pleased; but always there was hatred in their wild eyes, and
the blacks feared them exceedingly.  Because they feared them, although
they hated them, they gave them food, and the women cooked it for
themselves, for at that time the fire blossomed at the door of every
hut.

But one day, the blacks awoke to find the women gone.  They had gone in
the night, silently, and with them they took all the fire that the
blacks had.  There was not even a coal left to start the hearth-blaze
for the shivering people.

The fighting-men made haste to arm themselves, and started in pursuit
of the women.  They travelled through swamps and morasses, across boggy
lands and creeks fringed with reeds and sedges; all the time seeing
nothing of the women, but knowing that they were on the right track, by
the faint smell of fire that still hung in the air.  "They have gone
this way, carrying Fire!" they said.  "Soon we shall overtake them."
And they pressed on, going faster and faster as the smell of burning
wood became stronger and stronger.

At last they came out upon a little open space, and, looking across it,
they saw a new wurley made of bushes interlaced with reeds.  In front
of it smoke curled up lazily, and they caught the gleam of red coals,
and yellow flame.  The two women sat by the fire, motionless.  The
fighting-men broke into a run, shouting: "Now we will make an end of
these women!" they cried fiercely to each other, as they ran, gripping
their spears and throwing-sticks.

The women sat by the fire taking no heed.  So little did they seem to
notice the running warriors that it seemed that they did not see them;
or, if they did see them, they cared no more than for a line of black
swans flying westward into the sunset.  One stirred the fire gently,
and laid across the red embers a dried stick of she-oak.  The other
weaved a mat of rushes in a curious device of green and white; and as
she twisted them in and out, she smiled.  Even when the long shout of
the fighting-men sent its echoes rolling round the sky, they did not
look up.  The glow of the flames shone reflected deep in their eyes.

So the fighting-men came on, grim and relentless, burning with the
anger of all their long chase and the hot desire for revenge.  They
tightened their grip on their waddies, since there was nothing to be
gained by risking a throwing-stick or a spear when the enemy to be
slain was only two women, weak and unarmed.  For such defenceless
creatures, a blow with a waddy would be sufficient.  But, half a
spear's cast from the wurley, something they could not see brought them
to a sudden, gasping halt.  It was as though a wall were there, soft
and invisible, but yet a wall.  They could not touch it to climb over
it, neither could they force their way through.  They struck at it, and
it was as if their sticks struck the empty air.  There was nothing to
see but the wurley, and the fire, and the quiet women, and the air was
clear and bright.  But no step farther could they advance.

They circled about the camp, trying at every step to get nearer to the
wurley.  It was all to no purpose: always the wall met them, though
they could not see it.  So they came back to the point whence they had
started, breathless, angry, and a little afraid.  They were brave men,
and used to battle, but it is easier to fight a visible enemy than one
that lurks, unseen, in the air.  It was Magic, and they knew it.
Still, their anger burned furiously within them, and one lifted a spear
tipped with poisoned bone, and flung it at the women.  To see him lift
his hand was enough for the band.  A storm of spears went hurtling
through the air.

For a few yards the spears flew straight and true.  But then they
stopped suddenly in mid-flight, as though an unseen wall had met them.
For a moment they seemed to hang in the air, then they fell in a
jangling heap among the tussocks.  And beyond them, while the terrified
warriors shrank together, gesticulating and trembling, the women laid
more sticks upon the fire, and smiled.

The fighting-men were cunning, and they did not give in easily.  Not
only were they smarting with the fury of defeat, but the tale was not
one they wished to carry back to the tribe, lest they should become a
laughing-stock even to the women and young boys.  So they drew off,
thinking under cover of night to renew the attack in the hope that when
the women slept their Magic would also sleep.  So, when darkness had
fallen, they crept up again, on noiseless feet.  But the invisible wall
was there, and they could find no gap in its circle; while, all the
time, the fire burned redly before the wurley, and the women sat by it,
feeding it, and weaving their mats of white and green.

At length the warriors became weak for want of food, and weary of the
useless struggle; and so they gave up the fight and slowly made their
way back, across swamp-land and morass, to the tribe that waited for
them, shivering and fireless, in the shadow of the hills.

Great and bitter were the lamentations at the news of their defeat.
They had been eagerly watched for; and when they came slowly back to
the camp, trailing their spears, a long cry of angry disappointment
rent the air.  It was difficult to believe their story.  Who could
imagine a wall, strong enough to stop warriors, yet that could not be
seen?  So they found themselves coldly looked upon, and their wives
said unpleasant things to them in their wurleys that night.  Quite a
number of wives had sore heads next morning--since it was easier to
deal with a talkative wife by means of a waddy than by argument.  But
the wives had the last word, for all that, and the small boys of the
tribe used to call jeering words at the disgraced warriors, from the
safe concealment of a clump of dogwood, or fern.  Meanwhile, there was
no cooked food.  The tribe was very far from being happy.

Then a band of young men, who were not picked warriors, but were
anxious to distinguish themselves, made up their minds that they would
go forth to find the Fire-Women and slay them, and bring back Fire to
the tribe.  They were very young men, and so they were confident that
they could succeed where the warriors had failed; and for at least a
week before they started they went about the camp telling every one how
they meant to do it.  When they were not doing this, or singing songs
about the great deeds they meant to perform--and very queer songs they
were--they were polishing their weapons and making new ones, and
talking together, at a great rate, of their secret plans.  When they
were ready, at last, they painted themselves with as much pipe-clay as
they were allowed to use, and gathered together to start.

"When we have killed the Fire-Women," they said to the tribe, "some of
us will turn homewards and wait here and there along the way.  Then the
others will run with the fire-stick, and as they grow tired those that
have gone ahead will take it and run very swiftly back to you.  In
three days the tribe will be cooking food with the fire which we shall
bring.  Then we shall get married and have wurleys and fires of our
own."

All the blacks listened gravely, except the fighting-men who had not
brought back anything at all.  These men laughed a little, but no one
took any notice of their laughter, because they had failed, and it is
the way of the world not to think well of failures.  The girls thought
the band of young warriors wonderfully noble, and smiled upon them a
great deal as they marched out of the camp.  Of course, the boys were
much too proud to smile back again--but then, the girls did not expect
them to, and were quite content to do all the smiling.  So the little
band marched off with a great flourish, and the Bush swallowed them up.

"May they come back soon!" said one girl, as she and her companions dug
for yams next day.

"Ay!" said the others.  "We are weary of eating things which are not
cooked."

"I am weary of being cold," said one.  "There is but one 'possum rug in
our wurley, and my father takes it always."

"There will be great feasting and joy when they bring Fire back," said
another.  "Perhaps some of us will be married, too."  And they laughed
and made fun of each other, after the fashion of girls of any colour.

But the three days had not past when the young men returned: and when
they came, they sneaked back quietly into the camp and tried to look as
if they had not gone at all.  They had washed the pipe-clay from their
bodies, and were all quite anxious to work very hard and make
themselves exceedingly useful to the older men; nor were they at all
anxious to talk.  They gave severe blows to the young boys who
clustered round them, clamouring for news, and told them to go and
play.  But when they were summoned before the leaders, they hung their
heads and told the same story as the warriors.  They had seen the
Fire-Women, they said, and they still sat before their wurley and fed
the fire; but the young men could not come near them, nor could any of
their weapons reach them.  And when they were wearied with much
throwing, and their arms had grown stiff and sore, a great fear came
suddenly upon them, and they turned and fled homeward through the
scrub, never stopping until they came upon the huts they knew.  Now
they were very much ashamed, and the girls mocked at them, but the
warriors shook their heads understandingly.

"To fight is no good," they said.  "Unless the magic-men can tell us
how to beat down the magic wall and conquer the Fire-Women, the tribe
will go for ever without Fire.  We are wonderfully brave, but we cannot
fight witchcraft.  Let the magic-men undertake the task, for indeed it
is a thing beyond the power of simple men.  But is it not for such
matters that we keep the magic-men?"

Then all the tribe said, "Yes, that is what we have been thinking all
along."  And they looked expectantly at the magic-men, demanding that
they should at once accomplish the business, without any further
trouble.  Every one became quite pleased and hopeful, except the
magic-men themselves--and _they_ were in a very bad temper, because
they did not like the task.

Still they held their heads high, and made little of the matter,
because to do anything else would have been imprudent: and they looked
as wise as possible--a thing they had trained themselves to do, whether
they knew anything about a matter or not.  All kinds of wise men can do
this, and it is a very handy habit, because it makes people think them
even wiser than they are.  They went away by themselves, with dreadful
threats of what might happen if the people came near them--not that
there was any need for them to take such precautions, for the blacks
were much too terrified by them to venture near when they were working
any kind of Magic.

A great deal of what the blacks called Magic would seem very stupid to
you if you watched it now; but they all believed in it firmly, and even
those who knew that they deceived others still thought that Magic was a
real thing, and that it could be practised upon them.  The magic-men
shut themselves up for a time; and then they told the men that they had
made themselves into crows, and had flown over to watch what the
Fire-Women were doing.  As all the tribe believed that, they could turn
themselves into any animal they chose, and be invisible, nobody thought
of doubting this.  The magic-men then began to weave spells.  They
chopped the branches from a young she-oak tree, and cleared away grass
and sticks in a circle round it.  Then they sharpened the end of the
trunk, and drew on the ground the figure of a woman, with the lopped
tree growing out of her chest.  Afterwards they rubbed themselves all
over with charcoal and grease, and danced and sang songs round the tree
for some days, expecting the Fire-Women to feel their Magic, so that
they would have to rise from their camp and walk, as if in a sleep, to
the place of the dance.  But the women did not come, and so the
magic-men told themselves that they were not yet strong enough.
Meanwhile, the tribe clustered some distance off, very frightened and
respectful, and also very cold.

[Illustration: "They rubbed themselves all over with charcoal and
grease, and danced and sang songs round the tree."]

The magic-men tried other plans, although they were much hampered
because many of their spells needed the use of Fire, and there was none
to be had.  They tried to kill the women by pointing magic things in
the direction of their camp, such as bones, and pieces of
quartz-crystal, which were believed to be very deadly; and, going to
their old wurley, they put sharp fragments of bone in any footprints
they could find, thinking that the women would fall ill and become very
lame, and so lose their power.  But nothing happened.  So they sent one
of their number secretly through the Bush, and he returned to tell them
that the women were well and unharmed, and that the invisible wall
about their camp was just as strong as ever.

Then the magic-men knew that they could do no more.  They told the
people that the only spells that would conquer the Fire-Women were
spells in which Fire formed a part; and until they could bring them
Fire, they must not expect to be freed from the power of the women.
The tribe did not like this, and much lamentation went up; but they
were much too afraid of the magic-men to object openly to anything they
did.



CHAPTER II

At this time there lived in the tribe a man called Wurip.

He was not a lucky man.  Once, in a big tribal fight, most of his
relations had been killed; and when he was still quite a young man, his
wife died of a mysterious sickness, before they had been married very
long.  Then, one night, he tripped and fell into a big fire, burning
himself terribly.  He got better, but his left arm and hand were quite
twisted and withered, and were of very little use to him.

Had he been a different kind of man, it is not unlikely that he would
have been killed by the tribe, for the blacks had no use for maimed or
deformed persons.  But Wurip was strong, apart from his twisted arm;
and also he had a way of muttering to himself that rather frightened
people.  It was only a habit, but the blacks were always afraid of what
they could not understand.  So they left him alone.

He lived in a little wurley by himself, and though he was lonely, and
would have liked to take another wife, he knew that no girl would want
a man whose arm and hand were not like those of other men.  So he did
not try to get married, and gradually he became very solitary.  He
thought the other men disliked him, and he would go away by himself on
hunting expeditions, and wander through the scrub alone.  Although he
was half a cripple, he soon learned to know the Bush more thoroughly
than any man in the tribe, and he trained his shrivelled arm to do a
great deal, although at first it had seemed that it must be useless for
ever.  The other blacks at first gave him nick-names about his arm, but
he did not like them, and his eyes were so fierce that they did not let
him hear them any more, and to his face only called him by his own
name, Wurip, which means "a little bird."

Now, Wurip loved his tribe.  He had no special friends in it, which was
partly his own fault, for he had grown very unsociable, but he was
proud of the tribe itself, because it was brave and owned good country,
and had been successful in many fights.  It made him sore at heart to
see it suffering from the want of Fire, and also it hurt his pride that
it should have been beaten by women.  So he made up his mind that he
would try to recover Fire from the wicked Fire-Women.  He thought about
it for a long time, and laid his plans very carefully.

One day he left the camp, carrying no weapons, but only a single waddy.
The other blacks said to him:

"Where are you going?"

Wurip said, "I go to try to get Fire back."

"You!" they said.  "A little man, and crippled!  That is very funny."
And all the people laughed at him.

Wurip hesitated, and a gleam came into his eyes, so quick and fierce
that those who had laughed shrank back.  Then he turned on his heel and
walked off into the scrub, and the blacks said, "Let him go.  He is
mad, and he will most likely be killed; and it really does not matter.
He is not much use."

Into the wild Bush Wurip went, taking short noiseless strides.  He was
a little man, but he had the quick movements of many little men, and at
all times he could move rapidly through the Bush, scarcely making a
sound as he went.

He passed through the scrub, and came to boggy lands and morasses; his
light feet carried him over swamps and across creeks fringed with reeds
and sedges.  Then he saw a light curl of smoke going lazily skywards,
and at the sight his heart gave a leap, for it was long since he had
seen Fire.

Until then he had travelled very quickly.  But now he slackened his
speed and went slowly across the plain towards the Fire-Women's camp.
As he drew near he could see them, sitting in front of the wurley and
weaving their rushes.  They did not look up as he came, and he advanced
so near them that he began to think that the magic wall could be there
no longer.  Just as he was wondering if this were indeed true, one of
the Fire-Women glanced up and saw him; and almost immediately Wurip
felt some invisible object blocking his way, and knew he could go no
farther.

He stopped, and burst out laughing, and at the sound of his merriment
the other Fire-Woman glanced up sharply from her weaving, and the first
one paused, with a stick of she-oak wood in her hand, and looked at him
in blank astonishment.  So silent was the place that Wurip's shout of
laughter echoed like a thunderclap.  The Fire-Women looked at the
little black figure standing among the harsh tussocks of swamp-grass,
and he waved to them with his withered arm.  But they took no further
notice, going on scornfully with their work.

Wurip had expected nothing else, and he was not discouraged.  He began
collecting sticks and brushwood for a wurley, singing as he went about
his work, in full view of the two women.  He made no further attempt to
get through the invisible wall.  There was not much timber about, and
to find suitable material for his wurley was a difficult task.  He
walked slowly, using his crippled arm very little, because he hoped
that the women would be less careful about him if they regarded him as
a one-armed man.  Sometimes he felt that they were looking at him, and
then he would work with particular awkwardness.  Always, however, he
sang, and went about with a merry countenance, as if he had not a
single care in the world.

He built his wurley and went off into the swamp to hunt, returning with
some lizards and grubs, and a duck that he had caught just as it
settled on a sedgy pool.  Standing a little way back from the wall, he
called out and threw the duck towards the fire where the women sat.
But it fell before it reached them, meeting the unseen obstacle.

"What a pity--it is for you!" called Wurip, slowly, so that they could
hear easily.  "It is a fat duck."  And saying this he laughed again,
and went into his wurley, where he ate his supper contentedly--although
it was not cooked--and went to sleep.

In the morning, the women were sitting as before.  But the duck had
gone, and, looking closely across the little space, Wurip saw that
there were feathers lying about near their fire.  Also there was a
pleasant smell of cooking in the air.  This gladdened his heart, for it
showed that the women did not mind making him useful, and that was
exactly what he wanted.

So the days went by, and Wurip lived in his wurley, and the women in
theirs.  He never saw them away from it.  Neither did he try any more
to go near it.  From time to time he made them friendly signals, or
called cheerful greetings to them, but that was all.  Each day he went
hunting, and good luck always attended him, because it was the time
when waterfowl are plentiful, and as no others hunted there, the birds
were not afraid.  It was quite easy to fill the bag he had made out of
rushes.  And each evening he put the best of the game on a big stone
some distance from his wurley, and in the morning it was always gone.

This went on for fourteen days.  When he was not hunting, Wurip lay
about his camp, always singing contentedly as he carved himself
boomerangs or whittled heads for throwing-spears that he never used.
Once he carved a bowl from a root that he found, and this also he put
on the stone, for the Fire-Women, and they took it.  He gathered
bundles of the rushes that women of the tribes use in weaving, and left
them too.  So that he became very useful to them, although he had never
heard their voices.

Then, after fourteen days, Wurip pretended that he had fallen sick.  He
did not go out hunting any more, neither did he place offerings upon
the big stone.  In his wurley he had hidden sufficient food for himself
to last him for several days, but he did not let the Fire-Women see him
eating.  Instead, he crawled out, dragging himself along the ground,
and cried out, sorrowfully, waving his withered arm to them.  He
crawled back into his wurley and ate and slept; but they did not come,
as he had hoped they would.

Next day he did not go out into the open at all.  He kept close within
his wurley, and all the exercise he took was to groan very mournfully.
He groaned nearly all day, and by the time it was evening he was more
tired than if he had hunted for three days.  Because he was tired he
ate nearly all that remained of his food, after which he felt
discouraged, for he realized that it would soon be necessary to go out
hunting again, and he wanted to seem ill.  So he groaned more loudly
than ever, and once or twice cried out as if in pain.  Then he fell
asleep.

The Fire-Women were fierce creatures, but still they were women.  It
troubled them that this crippled little blackfellow should be ill, too
ill to bring them gifts or to busy himself, singing and laughing about
his camp.  To sit over a fire and weave mats of white and green may, in
time, become dull; and it cheered the women to see Wurip and listen to
his songs.  When he did not appear they took counsel together, agreeing
that so small a fellow, with a withered arm, could not be dangerous.

So, in the morning, Wurip heard steps, and opening his eyes, he saw one
of the women entering his wurley.  He almost jumped up; then,
remembering, he groaned heavily, and looked at her with a stupid stare.
She spoke to him, asking what was the matter, but he only moaned in
answer.  So she picked him up--it was not difficult, for she was very
powerful, and Wurip was quite light--and carried him over to where her
sister sat.  There seemed to be no invisible wall now: the Fire-Woman
walked to the fire, and put Wurip down before it.  He nearly shouted,
it was so long since he had been near a fire: but, luckily, he
remembered to turn the shout into a groan.

For some days Wurip pretended to be very ill, and the Fire-Women nursed
him--not in the harsh fashion of the medicine-men, but in gentler
manner, feeding him, and giving him a comfortable bed to lie on.  Wurip
was only too glad to lie still and be fed, and it was not hard for him
to pretend to be ill, because, being black, he was not required to look
pale.  Moreover, to taste cooked food once more nearly made him weep
with joy.  He was very grateful to the Fire-Women, and told them that
he was an outcast from the tribe, because of his crippled arm, and he
begged that, when he grew better, they would allow him to serve them.

The Fire-Women were not sorry to have a servant.  Getting food and
firewood was not very entertaining for them, and the gathering of
rushes was a long and laborious task, which they hated.  There could,
they thought, be no risk in taking so harmless a person as Wurip to
work for them.  Still, they were stern with him.  They told him that
when he was well he must live in his own wurley and only come near
theirs when it was necessary.  Also, they assured him that if he were
unfaithful to them their Magic would strike him dead immediately.  This
made Wurip think very hard, for he did not want to meet such an
unpleasant fate, although he was quite determined to take Fire back to
his tribe.

He showed great horror at the idea of being unfaithful, and when he
thought it was prudent to get better he recovered his strength--not too
quickly, for it was very pleasant to be nursed--and then began his
duties.  The Fire-Women found him an excellent servant.  He was always
at hand when he was wanted, and he did his work well.  There was plenty
of food at all times, and very long fine rushes that he found when he
was hunting far from the camp.  Wood he brought also, but the
Fire-Women would never allow him to go near the fire.  He laid the
sticks at a little distance away: and they tended the fire and cooked
the food, giving him a share.  Altogether, they were very happy and
comfortable, and if he had been able to forget the shivering tribe,
Wurip would have been content.  Although he was only a servant, he was
less lonely than he had been in the company of the other blacks.  The
Fire-Women were stern with him, but they never made him remember that
his arm was crippled--and when he had been with the tribe he could not
forget for an instant that he was different to the others.

Sometimes in the evenings, as he lay in his wurley, the thought came to
him that it would be better to forget the tribe and stay with the
Fire-Women.  After all, they were good to him in their fierce fashion,
and he remembered that he had very little to look forward to, in
returning to the big camp.  Even if he took back the long-lost Fire,
they might be grateful to him for a little while, but he would never be
as the other men were.

And then Memory would come to him, bringing back pictures of the tribe,
half starved and shivering; of the little children who were dying for
want of proper food and warmth, and of the cold hearth-stones of his
people.  However they might treat him, he could not forget that they
were his own people.  He knew that he must go back to them.



CHAPTER III

Wurip lay on his back in the shade of a golden wattle and listened idly
to the Bush voices talking round him.  He heard far more than you would
ever hear--voices of whispering leaves and boughs, of rustling grass,
and softly-moving bodies.  Not a grasshopper could brush through a
tussock but Wurip knew that it had passed.  Overhead, birds were
twittering gaily in the branches.  He knew them all--had he been hungry
he might have wanted to set snares for some of the little chirping
things, but just then he was too well-fed and lazy to trouble about
such tiny morsels.  He bit long grass-stems lazily, and tried to sleep.

A pair of jays flew into a tree close by, and began to chatter to each
other, and suddenly Wurip found that he knew what they were saying.
Somehow, it did not seem surprising that he should know.  Afterwards he
wondered if he had dreamed it, but at the moment nothing was strange to
him.  The jays, eager and chattering, did not notice the little black
figure in the grass.  They were too full of their subject.

"The Fire-Women have nearly finished their weaving," said one.  "Soon
the last mat will be done.  They have worked very quickly since Wurip
brought them rushes."

"And then they will go away," said the other.

"Yes, then they will go quite away, and there will be no more Fire for
ever.  He-he! what would the tribe say!"

"And Wurip!"

"Yes, Wurip also.  What will he do when they have gone?"

"He will go back to his people, I suppose.  He cannot go with the
Fire-Women.  I think, brother," said the smaller jay, "that they mean
to sail away on their mats to another country, taking Fire with them."

"Certainly they mean to go, and to take Fire with them; did we not hear
them talking about it while we perched on their wurley?" said the
other.  "As for sailing away on their mats, I do not see now that can
be.  Mats are not like wings.  You are a foolish young bird."

"Well, why do they make them so strong and large, and how else will
they get away?" asked the other, looking down his beak in an abashed
way, out still sticking to his point.  "You cannot tell me those
things."

"I do not care to know," said the big jay; and that was untrue, because
jays are very inquisitive.  "What does it matter?  They are only
humans.  But wonder what Wurip would say, if he knew."

"Wurip thinks he will take Fire back to the tribe.  But I do not think
he will ever get it.  The Fire-Women watch him too closely--and anyhow,
he is only a little cripple."

"He would be excited if he knew what we heard them say--that if they
lost any of it now, all the rest would go out, and then their power
would leave them, so that they could work no more Magic."

"He-he-he!" chattered the other jay.  "But he will never know that.
They do not talk when he is near."

"No, they are wise.  It is a very foolish thing to talk," said his
brother solemnly.  Yet they chattered for a little while longer, and
then they flew away.

Wurip lay motionless under the wattle-tree, and forgot to bite
grass-stems any more.  He was not sure whether he was awake or
dreaming; and he did not greatly care, because he felt that the warning
that had come to him was true, whether he had dreamed it or not.

It fitted in with little things he had noticed.  Lately the Fire-Women
had been very busy at their weaving, working night and day, so that he
could hardly bring them rushes quickly enough.  A great pile of mats
lay ready in a corner of their wurley, and now they were working
together at the largest of all.  They had seemed restless and excited,
too, and talked earnestly together, although they were careful not to
let him hear anything, and never to let him go near the fire.  Not that
they seemed to fear now that he would try to approach it.  Wurip had
been very careful, never even glancing towards it as he worked about
the camp.  He was allowed to place his firewood at a certain spot, and
took great pains not to go beyond it.  In every way in his power he
used to try to make them think that he was afraid of Fire and dreaded
to go too close to it since he had burned his arm.  By this means he
seemed to have put their suspicions to sleep, and they regarded him as
a harmless little fellow, of whom they need have no fear.

He made his way back to the camp, slowly, thinking hard.  If the
Fire-Women were really going away, he must act, and act quickly.  At
any time they might finish their work; and then they would disappear
for ever, and there would be no more Fire to warm the people of the
earth.  Wurip drew up his thin little body as he walked, and clenched
his fist.  He made up his mind that he would act that very night.

He found the camp just as usual, with the Fire-Women working at their
greatest mat of all, weaving it in and out in a curious device of green
and white.  One held the white strands, and the other the green; and
their black hands worked so quickly that Wurip could scarcely see to
which woman they belonged.  He looked at it with great admiration, and
ventured a timid word of praise.  Then he went a little way off and
began to skin the native cats and bandicoots that he had brought home.

When he had prepared them for cooking, he laid them carefully on
crossed sticks and put them in a shady corner.  It was growing dusk,
and he hurried off to find firewood.  All the time, he was turning many
plans over and over in his mind, and rejecting one after another as
useless.  Well, he thought, he must trust to luck.

He came back to the camp with his bundle of wood, and began to heap it
in the accustomed place, keeping a respectful distance from the Fire,
and bending down his eyes, lest their burning desire should be seen.
Already the sun had gone away over the edge of the world, and darkness
was coming fast.  The Fire-Women had been forced to stop weaving, for
the pattern of the great mat was too fine to weave by firelight.
Generally, when they had finished, one carried the work into the wurley
while the other remained outside to watch Wurip and begin the cooking.
But the great mat was now too heavy for one to lift, and so they rolled
it up, and carried it away together.

Wurip, crouching over his heap of firewood, felt his body suddenly
stiffened like a steel spring.  Under his brows he watched them; and as
the wurley hid them, he darted forward, snatched a big fire-stick from
the glowing coals, and fled, with great noiseless bounds that carried
him in a moment far into the dusk.  Behind him he heard a sudden loud
anguished cry, and knew that the Fire-Women had found out his theft.

For a moment he feared that the magic wall would spring up to bar his
way, and he ran as he had never run before.  But it did not come; and
into his mind swept the words of the jay, that if Fire were taken from
the Women, they would lose their power of Magic.  He hardly dared to
think that could be so--but as he ran on, finding no unseen obstacle in
his way, hope surged over him.  Magic was a thing against which no man
could fight.  But if he had only ordinary women to deal with, he was
not afraid.

A few hundred yards from the wurley, he glanced back, and saw that
their fire no longer sent its red gleam into the dusk.  His heart leapt
with joy, for it seemed as if the jays' story must be true; and if so,
the Fire-Women's hearth was cold, and already the only Fire in the
world was what he carried.  The greatness of the thought caught his
breath--surely such an honour should be for the bravest warrior of the
tribe, and not for a half-crippled, undersized weakling like him.  And
behind him came a sudden trampling of running feet, and a cry of such
terrible anger that the very waterfowl in the swamps hid themselves in
fear.  The Fire-Women were on his track.

Wurip ran forward, leaping from tussock to tussock sometimes slipping
into bog-holes, and scratching his bare limbs on great clumps of
sword-grass.  In his withered hand he clutched the fire-stick; the
other held his waddy, and sometimes he was glad to use it to help
himself over rough places.  Luckily, he knew the ground well--there was
no part of it that he had not studied on his days out hunting, knowing
that at any time he might have to make his dash for home.  He hid the
glow of the fire-stick as much as he could, holding it so close to him
that his skin was scorched by it; but his precautions could not conceal
it altogether, and to the Fire-Women behind him it was like a red star,
twinkling low down upon earth.

They came after Wurip swiftly.  At first they had uttered savage cries
of wrath, and fierce threats of what they would do to Wurip when they
caught him; but soon it seemed that they knew that shouts and threats
were useless, and after that they hunted him silently, only the quick
pad of their feet being heard in the darkness.  They were terribly
quick feet.  Wurip had not dreamed that women could run so fast.
Sometimes, as the moon rose, he could see them in pursuit, grim and
revengeful, looking like giants in the darkness.  His soul was full of
terror at the thought of what they would do if they caught him, for he
knew that he would be but a little child in their hands.

They crossed the swamps and morasses, and the reed-fringed creeks--and
here Wurip lost ground, for he had to go very carefully, lest he should
slip and so drown the precious fire-stick that he held close to him.
Only a blackfellow could have kept it alight so long; but Wurip knew
just how to hold it so that the air fanned it enough to keep the dull
coals glowing, without letting it burn too quickly away.  He heard the
Fire-Women splash through the creeks, not far behind him.  Then they
came into the scrub-country, all running at their wildest speed, for
this was the last part of the journey back to the tribe.

Then Wurip knew that he must be beaten.  He was nearly done--his breath
came unevenly, and his limbs were like lead, and would no longer do his
bidding.  Fierce and untired, close behind him, came the Fire-Women.  A
little ahead, he knew of a bed of green bracken fern in a gully, and he
set his teeth in the resolve to get thus far.

They were quite near him when the dark line of the gully showed,
somewhat to his left.  He threw all his remaining strength into a last
spurt of energy, and then, turning from the straight line towards the
camp of the tribe, he crept through the scrub to the gully, holding
both hands over the fire so that it might not guide the Fire-Women to
his place of refuge, and heedless of the cruel burning.  He reached the
gully safely, and flung himself face downwards among the rank ferns and
nettles, panting as if his heart would burst from his body.  He heard
the Women run past, tirelessly swift; there came to him their angry
voices, calling softly, lest they should miss each other in the dim
scrub.  They had not seen him swerve--that was clear; and Wurip hugged
himself with joy to think that for the moment he was safe.

When they had passed, and the sound of their feet had died away, he
crept from his gully and fled in a northerly direction.  He ran all
through the dark hours, with long trotting strides, as a dingo runs,
and circling round so that he might miss the Fire-Women and come upon
the camp from the other side.  Sometimes he paused to rest, listening
for the sound of the other hastening feet--but they did not come, and
at last he believed that he had escaped pursuit.

He was very tired--so tired that at last he lost something of the
blackfellow's keenness that guides him through even unknown country in
the dark.  Something seemed to have broken in his chest, from the time
of his last mad spurt from the Fire-Women, and now each breath stabbed
him.  Perhaps it was because he was so tired that at last he became
confused altogether, and swerved from the track he had mapped out for
himself to get back to the camp; and when dawn broke he was back in the
direction where he might expect to meet pursuit.  Even as this dawned
upon him, he looked up and saw the Fire-Women running silently towards
him, their fierce eyes gleaming.

Wurip knew it was the end.  He fled, knowing as he went that he could
not run far.  Behind him came the Women, tireless as though they had
not spent the night in fruitless chase.  He clutched the fire-stick to
him, scarcely knowing that it burned his hands and his naked chest.

Rounding a clump of saplings, a sob burst from his labouring chest.
Before him he saw the familiar camp, the wurleys clustered together; it
seemed to smile at him in home-like fashion.  So near home, to fail!
He spurred himself to the last effort.

Then from the camp burst a knot of fighting-men, racing towards him.
He caught the glint of the rising sun on their spears and
throwing-sticks; and he waved to them, for he could not shout.  They
came on with great strides: there was music in the sound of their
trampling feet.  When they came to him, they divided, running past him,
and Wurip staggered through the lane they formed.  He heard fierce
cries and blows behind him, but he did not stop.

Before him the camp lay, and never had it smiled to him a welcome so
sweet.  There were people running out to meet him; men, women, and
little children: he could hear their voices, amazed and
rejoicing--"Wurip!  It is Wurip, bringing us Fire!"  He tried to smile
at them, but his lips would not move.  So he staggered in to the circle
of the huts, and there fell upon his face, still grasping the red
fire-stick in his blistered hand.  It was all red now, for it had
burned down to the last few inches.

Then, as they clustered round him, lifting him with gentle hands and
blessing his name, he smiled at them a little, and died peacefully,
happy that he had brought back Fire to his own people.

But to the people he did not die.  Ever after they honoured his name,
calling him the benefactor of the tribe: so that in death he found that
honour that forgot he had ever been little and weak, and a cripple.
And when you see the little Fire-tailed Finch that hops about so
fearlessly, with the bright red feathers making a patch of flame on its
sober plumage, you are looking at Wurip, the Fire-bringer, who gave his
life to vanquish the wicked Fire-Women and to lay Fire once more upon
the hearth-stones of his tribe.



_Printed in Great Britain by_ Butler & Tanner, _Frome and London_



      *      *      *      *      *



  MARY GRANT BRUCE'S

  POPULAR STORIES

  Published by
  WARD, LOCK & CO., LTD.

  A LITTLE BUSH MAID
  TIMOTHY IN BUSHLAND
  MATES AT BILLABONG
  FROM BILLABONG TO LONDON
  GLEN EYRE
  NORAH OF BILLABONG
  GRAY'S HOLLOW
  JIM AND WALLY
  'POSSUM
  DICK
  CAPTAIN JIM
  DICK LESTER OF KURRAJONG
  BACK TO BILLABONG











End of Project Gutenberg's The Stone Axe of Burkamukk, by Mary Grant Bruce

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STONE AXE OF BURKAMUKK ***

***** This file should be named 56699.txt or 56699.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/6/9/56699/

Produced by Al Haines
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

